PDF page 4
MA THEMIA TI CS: G. W. MA CKE Y
respect to M itself.
Then regarding p, as we may, as a function on G X G
let UJ for all s e G and f e HL be defined by the equation (Uf) (t)
=
f(ts)/IVp(s-, ts).
It is readily verified that U, is a unitary transformation
of HL onto itself and that the mapping s -> U8 is a representation of G.
For
each Borel subset E of GIGo let 4 be its characteristic function regarded
as a function on G.
For f e HL let (P4D (t) = 4(t)f(t).
It is easy to see
that the mapping f -> PEf is a projection and that U and P together
constitute a pair in the sense of the above definition.
We shall call it
the pair generated by L and ,.
We can now formulate our main theorem.
THEOREM 2.
Let G be a separable locally compact group and let Go be a
closed subgroup of G.
Let U', P' be any pair based on GIGo.
Let ,
be any
quasi invariant measure in GIGo.
Then there exists a representation L
of Go such that U', P' is unitary equivalent to the pair generated by L and
A.
If L and L' are representations of Go and ,u and ,' are quasi invariant
measures in GIGo then the pair generated by L' and IA' is unitary equivalent
to the pair generated by L and ,u if and only'ifL and L' are unitary equivalent
representations of Go.
5.
Outline of Proof.-We shall give the proof in outline only leaving
relatively routine details
to the reader.
Moreover we shall assume
familiarity on the part of the reader with the paper cited in reference 1
and will omit arguments similar to those given there.
We shall refer to
this paper as SVN.
The proof falls naturally into two parts.
First we
show that every pair defines a representation of Go unique to Within unitary
equivalence and that two pairs defining equivalent representations of Go
are unitary equivalent.
Then we complete the proof by showing that the
representation of Go defined by the pair generated by an arbitrary L and
IA is unitary equivalent to L itself.
Given a pair U',P' based on GIGo we note first that the set of all PE'
is a uniformly n dimensional Boolean algebra of projections (n =
1, 2,
co) in the sense of Nakano (see SVN 5).
This follows from the
fairly easily proved fact that G acting on GIGo is ergodic.
Let N denote
an n dimensional identity representation of Go, let ,u be a quasi invariant
measure in G/Go and let W,P be the pair generated by N and IA.
Just as
in No. 6 of SVN it is possible to show that the pair U',P' is unitary equiva-
lent to the pair U,P where P comes from the pair W,P above and U is a
suitable representation of G.
We define Q, as U,,W8- and observe that
QSPE = PEQ, for all E and s.
It follows as in SVN that there exists a
weakly Borel function Q' from G X G to the group of unitary operators
in the space H1 in which the N, act such that for each s in G we have
(Qjf)(t) = Q'(s, t)f(t).
The identity Q(sls2, t) = Q
(sl, t)Q
(s2, tsO)
holding for almost all triples is established as in SVN and from it the ex-
istence of a weakly Borel function B such that Q-(s, t) = B-1(t)B(ts)
almost everywhere.
The fact that the functions in HN are constant on the
54
PROC. N. A. S.

PDF page 5
MA THEMA TICS: G. W. MA CKEY
right Go cosets implies that Q'(s, it) = Q(s, t) for all t e Go almost every-
where in s and t.
This implies in turn that B-1(tt)B(Qts) = B-'(t)B(ts)
in the same sense or equivalently that B(Qts)B-'(ts) = B(tt)B-'(t).
In
short for each t e Go, B(tt)B-'(t) is almost everywhere equal to a certain
constant operator Lt.
A simple argument shows that (Ltvo, vl) is of the
form fJ,41(t) (B(t)v2, v1) for a dense set of vo's.
Here vo, v, and v2 are ele-
ments in Hi and
,t1 is a continuous complex valued function vanishing
outside of a compact subset of G.
It follows readily that (Ltvo, v,) is con-
tinuous in t and, since LE't, = LEILt2, that L(t
-- Lt) is a representation
of Go.
Of course L may depend upon the choice of ,u, the choice of the
unitary map of the given Hilbert space on HN and the choice of B.
How-
ever, the fact that any two IA's have the same null sets guarantees the lack
of dependence of L on ,u.
As to the other possible dependencies note that a
unitary map X of HN on itself which commutes with all PE is defined by an
equation of the form Xf(t) = X(t)f(t) where X(t) is a unitary operator on
H1 for each t and X(t) is a weakly Borel function of t.
Moreover X(Qt) =
X(t) for t e Go.
It is readily calculated that the effect on Q of a trans-
formation by X is to replace it by R where R(s, t) = X-'(t)Q(s, t)X(ts).
Now if C-I(t)C(ts) = X'-(t)B-I(t)B(ts)X(ts) it follows that B(t)X(t)C-'(t)
is (modulo null sets) independent of t.
Thus for some constant operator
K we have C(t) = KB(t)X(t) so that C(Qt)C-'(t) = KB(tt)X(it)X-1(t)-
B-I(t)K-1 = KLtK-'.
In short our original pair and ini fact the unitary
equivalence class to which it belongs determine L to within unitary equiva-
lence.
Conversely a simple reversal of the argument shows that pairs
leading to unitary equivalent L's must be themselves unitary equivalent.
Now let L' be an arbitrary representation of Go and let U',P' be the
pair generated by L' and a quasi invariant measure ,u in G/Go.
By the
argument of the preceding paragraph there is a unitary map V-1 of HL'
on some HN such that V-'PE'V = PE where W,P is as before the pair
generated by N and ,u and N is an identity representation of Go on a Hilbert
space H1.
It is not difficult to show that there exists a weakly Borel
function V- defined on G whose values are operators from H1 to the space
H2 in which L' operates such that (Vf)(t) = V(t)f(t).
It follows from
the fact that V is unitary that V-(t) is unitary from H1 into H2 for almost
all t and it follows from the fact that Vf e HL' that for each t e Go, V_(,t) =
LE'V'(t) for almost all t.
Now the Q8 of the preceding paragraph here
take the form V-1 U8,VW8' so that U,' VW8' = VQ,.
Hence V- (ts) =
V-(t)Q-(s, t) or V-(ts) =
V-(t)B-'(t)B(ts) or V-(ts)B-1(ts) =
V-(t)-
B-1(t).
Thus there exists a norm preserving operator K independent of
t such that V-(t) = KB(t) for almost all t.
If K were known to map
HI onto the whole of H2 we could write B(t) = K'- V(t) and conclude at
once that B(it)B- (t) = K-LE' V'(t) V-'(t)K =K-'LeKandhencethatthe
L for U',P' is unitary equivalent to L'.
In order to show that K is indeed
VOL. 35, 1949
541

PDF page 6
MA THEMA TICS: G. W. MA CKE Y
PROC. N. A. S.
an onto mapping we must make use of certain facts about the space HL'
which so far as we know at this point might be zero dimensional.
For
each continuous function w from G to H2 which vanishes outside of a
compact subset of G let wv be defined by the equation
(w(t), v)
=
(L{t-`w({t), v)dt for all v in HI and all t in G.
This function may be shown
to be a continuous member of HL' which vanishes outside of a set whose
image in GIGo is compact.
Arguments of a fairly routine nature show
that for each t
e G the vectors wv(t) span H2.
Now suppose that K does not
map H1 onto H2.
Choose vo orthogonal to the range of K.
Consider an
arbitrary member of HL' of the form wv.
We have fw(t)
=
V-(t)f(t) for
some f and almost all t.
But V-(t)f(t) is in the range of K for almost all t.
Thus, since wv is continuous we can conclude that (wv(t), vo)
=
0 for all t.
Hence for all t, (w(t), vo) =
0 for all wv and this contradicts the fact that
the wv(t) span for each t.
6.
Reducibility.-The
natural
question
concerning
the
connection
between the reducibility of a pair U,P and the reducibility of the defining
representation of Go is easily answered.
If T commutes with all Lt then
a transformation T- taking HN into HN is defined by the equation (T-f)
(t) = B-'(t)TB(t)f(t) where B is the function used in defining L.
Then,
as is easily seen T -* T7
is a *-isomorphism of the ring of all bounded linear
operators which commute with all the Lt onto the ring of all bounded linear
operators whichicommute with all the U, and all of the PE.
In particular
the Us and the PB are simultaneously reducible if and only if L is a re-
ducible representation of Go.
7.
Application to the Determination of Group Representations.-Let G
be a separable locally compact group and let G1 be a closed normal Abelian
subgroup of G.
Let G" denote the character group of G1.
Every member
s of G defines an automorphism x
> sxs-' of G1 and this in turn induces an
automorphism y
G,
(y)s of
&.
Now let U be any irreducible representa-
tion of G.
Restricted to G1 it admits a spectral resolution defined by a
a homomorphism P of the Borel subsets of G, into a Boolean algebra of
projections in the Hilbert space H in which U acts.
An obvious calcula-
tion shows that U,PEU-1 = P(E),-1.
Thus P is a system of imprimitivity
for U.
Since U is irreducible P must be ergodic.
If we assume that
G1 is "regularly imbedded" in G in the sense that the orbits in G1 under G
are regular then Theorem 1 tells us that G1 may be replaced by a single
orbit.
Let y be a point in this orbit and let Gv be.the closed subgroup of
all s for which (y)s = y.
Theorem 2 tells us that U is unitary equivalent
to the first member of the pair generated by an irreducible representation
of G,.
If G is a "semi-direct product" of G1 and GIG1; that is, if there exists a
closed subgroup G2 such that GinG2 = e and G1G2 = G much more precise
information is available.
The reader will have no trouble in verifying
the truth of
542
