PDF PAGE 20
172
Bertrand Toën
cial resolutions must only be considered up to the notion of weak equivalence, and
are controlled by higher categorical, or homotopical, structures.
Based on these two principles we can already extract a general deﬁnition of a derived
scheme, simply by thinking that the structure sheaf should now be a sheaf of simplicial
commutative rings rather than a genuine sheaf of commutative rings. However, principle
2 already tells us that morphisms between these derived schemes will be a rather involved
notion and must be deﬁned with some care.
Deﬁnition 2.1. (First deﬁnition of derived schemes) A derived scheme consists of a pair
(X, OX), where X is a topological space and AX is a sheaf of commutative simplicial
rings on X such that the following two conditions are satisﬁed.
(1) The ringed space (X, π0(OX)) is a scheme.
(2) For all i > 0 the homotopy sheaf πi(OX) is a quasi-coherent sheaf of modules on
the scheme (X, π0(OX)).
Some comments about this deﬁnition.
• A scheme (X, OX) can be considered as a derived scheme in an obvious manner,
by taking OX to be the constant simplicial sheaf of rings OX.
• In the other way, a derived scheme (X, OX) underlies a scheme (X, π0(OX)) that
is called the truncation of (X, OX).
• A scheme can also be considered as a derived scheme (X, O′
X) where now O′
X is
any simplicial resolution of OX, that is
π0(O′
X) ≃OX
πi(O′
X) = 0 ∀i > 0.
As we will see, the derived scheme (X, O′
X) is equivalent to (X, OX) (exactly as a
resolution P∗of a module M is quasi-isomorphic to M concentrated in degree 0).
• For a derived scheme (X, OX), the truncation (X, π0(OX)) contains all the ge-
ometry. The sheaves πi(OX) on (X, π0(OX)) are pieces reﬂecting the derived
structure and should be thought as extraordinary nilpotent functions. The sheaves
πi(OX) are analogous to the graded pieces In/In+1 where I is the nilradical of a
scheme Y , which are sheaves on the reduced subscheme Yred. It is good intuition
and also accurate to think of OX as coming with a natural ﬁltration (incarnated by
the Postnikov tower, see §2.2) whose graded pieces are the πi(OX).
The above deﬁnition makes derived schemes an easy notion, at least at ﬁrst sight.
However, as already mentioned, morphisms between derived schemes require some care
to be deﬁned in a meaningful manner. In the sequel of this section we will explain how to
deal with derived schemes, how to construct and deﬁne their (∞)-category, but also how
to work with them in practice.


PDF PAGE 33
Derived algebraic geometry
185
Any derived ringed space (X, OX) has a truncation (X, π0(OX)) that is a (under-
ived) ringed space, where π0(OX) denotes here the sheaf of connected components.
We deﬁne dRgSploc as a (nonfull) sub-∞-category of dRgSp consisting of objects
(X, OX) whose truncation (X, π0(OX)) is a locally ringed space, and maps inducing
local morphisms on the ringed spaces obtained by truncations. The inclusion ∞-functor
dRgSploc ,→dRgSp is not fully faithful but it is faithful in the sense that the mor-
phisms induced on mapping spaces are inclusions of union of connected components.
With this new language the ∞-category of derived schemes is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.5. The ∞-category of derived schemes is deﬁned to be the full sub-∞-
category of dRgSploc consisting of all objects (X, OX) with the two conditions above
satisﬁed.
(1) The truncation (X, π0(OX)) is a scheme.
(2) For all i the sheaf of π0(OX)-modules πi(X) is quasi-coherent.
The ∞-category of derived schemes is denoted by dSt.
A ring can be considered as a constant simplicial ring, and this deﬁnes a full em-
bedding i : Comm ,→sComm, from the category of commutative of rings to the
∞-category of derived rings. This inclusion has a left adjoint given by the ∞-functor π0.
This adjunction extends to an adjunction at the level of derived ringed spaces, derived
locally ringed spaces and derived schemes. We thus have an adjunction
t0 : dSch ⇄Sch : i,
between the ∞-category of schemes and the category of schemes. The functor i is more-
over fully faithful, and therefore schemes sit inside derived schemes as a full sub-∞-
category. The ∞-functor t0 sends a derived scheme (X, OX) to the scheme (X, π0(OX)).
We will often omit to mention the functor i and simply considered Sch as sitting inside
dSch as a full subcategory. By adjunction, for any derived scheme X there is a natural
morphism of derived schemes
j : t0(X) −→X.
Remark 2.3. It is an accurate analogy to compare the morphism j : t0(X) −→X with
the inclusion Yred ,→Y , of the reduced subscheme Yred of a scheme Y . In this way, the
truncation t0(X) sits inside the derived scheme X, and X can be thought as some sort
of inﬁnitesimal thickening of t0(X), but for which the additional inﬁnitesimals functions
live in higher homotopical degrees.
The truncation t0 possesses generalizations t≤n for various integers n ≥0 (with
t0 = t≤0). Let X be a derived scheme. The stack of derived rings OX has a Postnikov
tower
OX →· · · →t≤n(OX) →t≤n−1(OX) →· · · →t0(OX) = π0(OX).
It is characterized, as a tower of morphisms in the ∞-category of stacks of derived rings
on X, by the following two properties.


PDF PAGE 38
190
Bertrand Toën
X possesses a quasi-coherent derived ∞-category Lqcoh(X), deﬁned as follows.
We consider the ∞-category Zaﬀ(X) of afﬁne open derived subschemes U ⊂X.
This ∞-category can be shown to be equivalent to a poset, in fact, through the func-
tor U 7→t0(U), to the poset of open subschemes in t0(X) (see [111, Prop. 2.1]). For
each object U ∈Zaﬀ(X) we have its derived ring of functions AU := H(U, OU).
The simplicial ring AU can be normalized to a commutative dg-algebra N(AU), for
which we can consider the category N(AU)-Mod of (unbounded) N(AU)-dg-modules
(see [124] for more about the monoidal properties of the normalization functor). Lo-
calizing this category along quasi-isomorphisms deﬁnes an ∞-category Lqcoh(U) :=
L(N(AU)-Mod, quasi-isom). For each inclusion of open subsets V ⊂U ⊂X, we
have a morphism of commutative dg-algebras N(AU) −→N(AV ) and thus an induced
base change ∞-functor −⊗L
N(AU) N(AV ) : Lqcoh(U) −→Lqcoh(V ). This deﬁnes an
∞-functor Lqcoh(−) : Zaﬀ(X)op −→∞-Cat, which moreover is a stack (i.e., satisﬁes
the descent condition explained in §2.1) for the Zariski topology. We set
Lqcoh(X) :=
lim
U∈Zaﬀ(X)opLqcoh(U) ∈∞-Cat,
where the limit is taken in the ∞-category of ∞-categories, and call it the quasi-coherent
derived ∞-category of X. When X is a scheme, Lqcoh(X) is an ∞-categorical model for
the derived category Dqcoh(X) of OX-modules with quasi-coherent cohomologies: we
have a natural equivalence of categories
[Lqcoh(X)] ≃Dqcoh(X).
When X = Spec A is afﬁne for a derived ring A, then Lqcoh(X) is naturally identiﬁed
with L(A) the ∞-category of dg-modules over the normalized dg-algebra N(A). We
will for E ∈L(A) often use the notation πi(E) := H−i(E). Similarly, for a general
derived scheme X, and E ∈Lqcoh(X), we have cohomology sheaves Hi(E) that are
quasi-coherent on t0(X), and which we will also denote by πi(E).
For a morphism between derived schemes f : X −→Y there is an natural pull-back
∞-functor f ∗: Lqcoh(Y ) −→Lqcoh(X), as well as its right adjoint the push-forward
f∗: Lqcoh(X) −→Lqcoh(Y ). These are ﬁrst deﬁned locally on the level of afﬁne derived
schemes: the ∞-functor f ∗is induced by the base change of derived rings whereas the
∞-functor f∗is a forgetful ∞-functor. The general case is done by gluing the local
constructions (see [128, §4.2], [130, §1.1] for details).
By the formal property of adjunction, for any commutative square of derived schemes
X′
g
/
q

X
p

Y ′
f
/ Y
there is a natural morphism between ∞-functors
h : f ∗p∗⇒q∗g∗: Lqcoh(X) −→Lqcoh(Y ′).


PDF PAGE 39
Derived algebraic geometry
191
The base change theorem (see [130, Prop. 1.4]) insures that h is an equivalence of ∞-
functors as soon as the square is cartesian and all derived schemes are quasi-compact
and quasi-separated. When all the derived schemes are schemes and moreover f is ﬂat,
then X′ is again a scheme and the base change formula recovers the usual well known
formula for schemes. When f and p are not Tor-independent the derived scheme X′ is not
a scheme and the difference between X′ and its truncation t0(X′) measures the excess
of intersection (see e.g. [47, §6]). All the classical excess intersection formulae can be
recovered from the base change formula for derived schemes.
Tangent complexes, smooth and étale maps. Let A be a derived ring and M a simpli-
cial A-module. We can form the trivial square zero extension A ⊕M of A by M. It is a
simplical ring whose underlying simplicial abelian group is A×M, and for which the mul-
tiplication is the usual one (a, m).(a′, m′) = (a.a′, am′ + a′m) (this formula holds de-
greewise in the simplicial direction). If we denote by X = Spec A, then Spec (A ⊕M)
will be denoted by X[M], and is by deﬁnition the trivial square zero extension of X by
M. We note here that M can also be considered through its normalization as a N(A)-dg-
module and thus as an object in Lqcoh(X) with zero positive cohomology sheaves.
This construction can be globalized as follows. For X a derived scheme and E an
object in Lqcoh(X) whose cohomology is concentrated in nonpositive degrees, we can
form a derived scheme X[M] as the relative spectrum Spec (OX ⊕E). Locally, when
X = Spec A is afﬁne, E corresponds to a simplicial A-module, and X[M] simply is
Spec (A ⊕M). The derived scheme X[M] sits under the derived scheme X itself and
is considered in the comma ∞-category X/dSch of derived schemes under X. The
mapping space MapX/dSch(X[M], X) is called the space of derivations on X with co-
efﬁcients in M, and when E = OX this can be considered as the space of vector ﬁelds on
X. It is possible to show the existence of an object LX together with a universal derivation
X[LX] −→X. The object LX together with the universal derivation are characterized by
the following universal property
MapX/dSch(X[M], X) ≃MapLqcoh(X)(LX, M).
The object LX is called the absolute cotangent complex of X. Its restriction on an afﬁne
open Spec A ⊂X is a quasi-coherent complex Lqcoh(Spec A) which corresponds to the
simplicial A-module LA introduced in [102].
The absolute notion has a relative version for any morphism of derived schemes
f : X −→Y . There is a natural morphism f ∗(LY ) −→LX in Lqcoh(X), and the
relative cotangent complex of f is deﬁned to be its coﬁber
LX/Y = Lf := cofiber (f ∗(LY ) −→LX) .
It is an object in Lqcoh(X), cohomologically concentrated in nonpositive degrees, and
equiped with a universal derivation X[LX/Y ] −→X which is now a morphism in the
double comma ∞-category X/dSch/Y .
One of the characteristic properties of derived schemes is that cotangent complexes
are compatible with ﬁbered products, as opposed to what is happening in the case of


PDF PAGE 40
192
Bertrand Toën
schemes. For any cartesian square of derived schemes
X′
g
/
q

X
p

Y ′
f
/ Y
the natural morphism g∗(LX/Y ) −→LX′/Y ′ is an equivalence in Lqcoh(X′). This prop-
erty is true in the setting of schemes only under some Tor-independence conditions insur-
ing the pull-back square of schemes remains a pull-back in derived schemes (e.g. when
one of the morphism f or p is ﬂat, see [71]).
We will see later on how cotangent complexes can also be used in order to understand
how morphisms decompose along Postnikov towers and more generally how they con-
trol obstruction theories (see our §4.1). Let us simply mention here that for any derived
scheme X, the inclusion of i : t0(X) −→X induces a morphism on cotangent complexes
i∗(LX) −→Lt0(X), which is always an obstruction theory on t0(X) in the sense of [10]
(see [110] for more details about the relation between derived scheme and the obstruction
theories induced on the truncations).
Finally, cotangent complexes can be used in order to deﬁne smooth and étale mor-
phisms between derived schemes. A morphism f : X −→Y in dSch will be called
étale (resp. smooth) if it is locally of ﬁnite presentation (see [138, §2.2.2] for the deﬁni-
tion of ﬁnite presentation in the homotopical context) and if Lf vanishes (resp. Lf is a
vector bundle on X). An étale (resp. smooth) morphism f : X −→Y of derived schemes
induces an étale (resp. smooth) morphism on the truncations t0(f) : t0(X) −→t0(Y ),
which is moreover ﬂat: for all i the natural morphism t0(f)∗(πi(OY )) −→πi(OX) is an
isomorphism of quasi-coherent sheaves on t0(X) (see [138, §2.2.2]). We easily deduce
from this the so-called Whitehead theorem for derived schemes: a morphism of derived
scheme f : X −→Y is an equivalence if and only if it induces an isomorphism on the
truncation and if it is moreover smooth.
Virtual classes. For a derived scheme X the sheaves πi(OX) deﬁne quasi-coherent
sheaves on the truncation t0(X). Under the condition that t0(X) is locally noetherian,
and that πi(OX) are coherent and zero for i ≫0, we ﬁnd a well deﬁned class in the
K-theory of coherent sheaves on t0(X)
[X]K-vir :=
X
i
(−1)i[πi(OX)] ∈G0(t0(X)),
called the K-theoretical virtual fundamental class of X.
The class [X]K-vir possesses another interpretation which clariﬁes its nature. We keep
assuming that t0(X) is locally noetherian and that πi(OX) are coherent and vanish for
i big enough. An object E ∈Lqcoh(X) will be called coherent if it is cohomologically
bounded and if for all i, Hi(E) is a coherent sheaf on t0(X). The ∞-category of co-
herent objects in Dqcoh(X) form a thick triangulated subcategory and thus can be used
in order to deﬁne G0(X) as their Grothendieck group. The group G0(X) is functorial
