PDF PAGE 45
3.1. FIBERED CATEGORIES
45
Remark 3.3. Given two pullbacks φ: ξ →η and eφ: eξ →η of η to U, the unique
arrow θ : eξ →ξ that ﬁts into the diagram
eξ_

θ
&L
L
L
L
eφ
%
ξ_

φ
/ η_

U
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
'
U
/ V
is an isomorphism; the inverse is the arrow ξ →eξ obtained by exchanging ξ and
eξ in the diagram above.
In other words, a pullback is unique, up to a unique isomorphism.
The following facts are easy to prove, and are left to the reader.
Proposition 3.4.
(i) If F is a category over C, the composite of cartesian arrows in F is cartesian.
(ii) If ξ →η and η →ζ are arrows in F and η →ζ is cartesian, then ξ →η is
cartesian if and only if the composite ξ →ζ is cartesian.
(iii) An arrow in F whose image in C is an isomorphism is cartesian if and only if it is
an isomorphism.
(iv) Let pG : G →C and F : F →G be functors, φ: ξ →η an arrow in F. If φ is
cartesian over its image Fφ: Fξ →Fη in G and Fφ is cartesian over its image
pGFφ: pGFξ →pGFη in C, then φ is cartesian over its image pGFφ in C.
Deﬁnition 3.5. A ﬁbered category over C is a category F over C, such that given an
arrow f : U →V in C and an object η of F mapping to V, there is a cartesian arrow
φ: ξ →η with pF φ = f.
In other words, in a ﬁbered category F →C we can pull back objects of F
along any arrow of C.
Deﬁnition 3.6. If F and G are ﬁbered categories over C, then a morphism of ﬁbered
categories F : F →G is a functor such that:
(i) F is base-preserving, that is, pG ◦F = pF;
(ii) F sends cartesian arrows to cartesian arrows.
Notice that in the deﬁnition above the equality pG ◦F = pF must be inter-
preted as an actual equality. In other words, the existence of an isomorphism of
functors between pG ◦F and pF is not enough.
Proposition 3.7. Let there be given two functors F →G and G →C. If F is ﬁbered
over G and G is ﬁbered over C, then F is ﬁbered over C.
PROOF. This follows from Proposition 3.4 (iv).
♠
3.1.2. Fibered categories as pseudo-functors.
Deﬁnition 3.8. Let F be a ﬁbered category over C. Given an object U of C, the
ﬁber F(U) of F over U is the subcategory of F whose objects are the objects ξ of
F with pFξ = U, and whose arrows are arrows φ in F with pF φ = idU.


PDF PAGE 46
46
3. FIBERED CATEGORIES
By deﬁnition, if F: F →G is a morphism of ﬁbered categories over C and U is
an object of C, the functor F sends F(U) to G(U), so we have a restriction functor
FU : F(U) →G(U).
Notice that formally we could give the same deﬁnition of a ﬁber for any func-
tor pF : F →C, without assuming that F is ﬁbered over C. However, we would
end up with a useless notion. For example, it may very well happen that we have
two objects U and V of C which are isomorphic, but such that F(U) is empty while
F(V) is not. This kind of pathology does not arise for ﬁbered categories, and here
is why.
Let F be a category ﬁbered over C, and f : U →V an arrow in C. For each
object η over V, we choose a pullback φη : f ∗η →η of η to U. We deﬁne a functor
f ∗: F(V) →F(U) by sending each object η of F(V) to f ∗η, and each arrow
β: η →η′ of F(V) to the unique arrow f ∗β: f ∗η →f ∗η′ in F(U) making the
diagram
f ∗η
/
f ∗β



η
β

f ∗η′
/ η′
commute.
Deﬁnition 3.9. A cleavage of a ﬁbered category F →C consists of a class K of
cartesian arrows in F such that for each arrow f : U →V in C and each object η in
F(V) there exists a unique arrow in K with target η mapping to f in C.
By the axiom of choice, every ﬁbered category has a cleavage. Given a ﬁbered
category F →C with a cleavage, we associate with each object U of C a category
F(U), and to each arrow f : U →V a functor f ∗: F(V) →F(U), constructed as
above. It is very tempting to believe that in this way we have deﬁned a functor
from C to the category of categories; however, this is not quite correct. First of all,
pullbacks id∗
U : F(U) →F(U) are not necessarily identities. Of course we could
just choose all pullbacks along identities to be identities on the ﬁber categories:
this would certainly work, but it is not very natural, as there are often natural de-
ﬁned pullbacks where this does not happen (in Example 3.15 and many others).
What happens in general is that, when U is an object of C and ξ an object of F(U),
we have the pullback ǫU(ξ): id∗
Uξ →ξ is an isomorphism, because of Proposi-
tion 3.4 (iii), and this deﬁnes an isomorphism of functors ǫU : id∗
U ≃idF(U).
A more serious problem is the following. Suppose that we have two arrows
f : U →V and g: V →W in C, and an object ζ of F over W. Then f ∗g∗ζ is a
pullback of ζ to U; however, pullbacks are not unique, so there is no reason why
f ∗g∗ζ should coincide with (g f)∗ζ. However, there is a canonical isomorphism
α f ,g(ζ): f ∗g∗ζ ≃(g f)∗ζ in F(U), because both are pullbacks, and this gives an
isomorphism α f ,g : f ∗g∗≃(g f)∗of functors F(W) →F(U).
So, after choosing a cleavage a ﬁbered category almost gives a functor from
C to the category of categories, but not quite. The point is that the category of
categories is not just a category, but what is known as a 2-category; that is, its
arrows are functors, but two functors between the same two categories in turn
form a category, the arrows being natural transformations of functors. Thus there
are 1-arrows (functors) between objects (categories), but there are also 2-arrows
(natural transformations) between 1-arrows.


PDF PAGE 55
3.3. CATEGORIES FIBERED IN GROUPOIDS
55
Take a morphism of schemes f : U →V. We need to prove that for any quasi-
coherent sheaf N on V we have the equality
αidU,f (N ) = ǫU( f ∗N ): id∗
U f ∗N −→f ∗N .
This is straightforward: by the covariant Yoneda lemma, it is enough to show that
αidU,f (N ) and ǫU( f ∗N ) induce the same natural transformation
HomOU( f ∗N , −) −→HomOU(id∗
U f ∗N , −).
But by deﬁnition the natural transformation induced by ǫU( f ∗N ) is
ΘidU( f ∗N , −),
while that induced by αidU,f (N ) is
ΘidU( f ∗N , −) ◦Θ f (N , (idU)∗−) ◦Θ f (N , −)−1 = ΘidU( f ∗N , −).
Similar arguments works for the second part of the ﬁrst condition and for the
second condition.
The ﬁbered category on (Sch/S) associated with this pseudo-functor is the
ﬁbered category of quasi-coherent sheaves, and will be denoted by (QCoh/S) →
(Sch/S).
There are many variants on this example. For example, one can deﬁne the
ﬁbered category of sheaves of O-modules over the category of ringed topological
spaces in exactly the same way.
3.3. Categories ﬁbered in groupoids
Deﬁnition 3.21. A category ﬁbered in groupoids over C is a category F ﬁbered over
C, such that the category F(U) is a groupoid for any object U of C.
In the literature one often ﬁnds a different deﬁnition of a category ﬁbered in
groupoids.
Proposition 3.22. Let F be a category over C. Then F is ﬁbered in groupoids over C if
and only if the following two conditions hold.
(i) Every arrow in F is cartesian.
(ii) Given an object η of F and an arrow f : U →pFη of C, there exists an arrow
φ: ξ →η of F with pFφ = f.
PROOF. Suppose that these two conditions hold: then clearly F is ﬁbered over
C. Also, if φ: ξ →η is an arrow of F(U) for some object U of C, then we see
from condition 3.22 (i) that there exists an arrow ψ: η →ξ with pFψ = idU and
φψ = idη; that is, every arrow in F(U) has a right inverse. But this right inverse ψ
also must also have a right inverse, and then the right inverse of ψ must be φ. This
proves that every arrow in F(U) is invertible.
Conversely, assume that F is ﬁbered over C, and each F(U) is a groupoid.
Condition (ii) is trivially veriﬁed. To check condition (i), let φ: ξ →η be an arrow
in C mapping to f : U →V in C. Choose a pullback φ′ : ξ′ →η of η to U; by
deﬁnition there will be an arrow α: ξ →ξ′ in F(U) such that φ′α = φ. Since F(U)
is a a groupoid, α will be an isomorphism, and this implies that φ is cartesian.
♠
Corollary 3.23. Any base-preserving functor from a ﬁbered category to a category ﬁbered
in groupoids is a morphism.


PDF PAGE 93
4.3. DESCENT FOR MORPHISMS OF SCHEMES
93
type over a ﬁeld k, of bounded dimension, with the arrows being morphisms of
schemes over k. Let us equip it with the Zariski topology, and let P be the class of
all arrows. Call U = U1 ∐U2 ∐U3 ∐U4 ∐. . . the union of countably many copies
of U1 = Spec k. The collection of inclusions {Ui ֒→U} forms a covering. Over
each Ui consider the scheme Ai
k. Obviously Uij = ∅if i ̸= j, and Uij = Spec k if
i = j, so we deﬁne transition isomorphisms in the only possible way as the identity
φii = idAi
k : Ai
k →Ai
k, and as the identity id∅: ∅→∅when i ̸= j. These obvi-
ously satisfy the cocycle condition, being all identities. On the other hand there
cannot be a scheme of bounded dimension over U, whose pullback to each Ui is
Ai
k.
This is an artiﬁcial example; obviously if we want to glue together inﬁnitely
many algebraic varieties, we shouldn’t ask for the dimension to be bounded. And
in fact, morphisms of schemes form a stack in the Zariski topology, and therefore
a local category of arrows also forms a stack in the Zariski topology.
On the other hand, most of the interesting properties of morphisms of schemes
are local in the fpqc topology on the codomain, such as for example being ﬂat, be-
ing of ﬁnite presentation, being quasi-compact, being proper, being smooth, being
afﬁne, and so on (Proposition 2.36). For each of these properties we get a prestack
of morphisms of schemes over (Sch/S), and we can ask if this is a stack in the fpqc
topology.
The issue of effectiveness of descent data is rather delicate, however. We will
give an example to show that it can fail even for proper and smooth morphisms,
in the ´etale topology (see 4.4.2). In this section we will prove some positive results.
4.3.1. Descent for afﬁne morphisms. Let P be the class of afﬁne arrows in
(Sch/S), and denote by (Aff/S) →(Sch/S) the resulting ﬁbered category. The
objects of (Aff/S) are afﬁne morphisms X →U, where U →S is an S-scheme.
Theorem 4.33. The ﬁbered category (Aff/S) is a stack over (Sch/S) in the fpqc topology.
First of all, (Aff/S) is a prestack, because of Proposition 4.31, so the only issue
is effectiveness of descent data. By Proposition 4.20 (ii) it is enough to check that
(Aff/S)cart is a stack.
Let A be a quasi-coherent sheaf of algebras on a scheme U. Then we denote
by S pecX A the relative spectrum of A; this is an afﬁne scheme over U, and if
V ⊆U is an open afﬁne subscheme of U, the inverse image of V in S pecU A is the
spectrum of the ring A(V).
A homomorphism of sheaves of commutative rings A →B induces a ho-
momorphism of U-schemes S pecU B →S pecU A; this is a contravariant functor
from QCohComm U to the category AffU of afﬁne schemes over U, which is well-
known to be an equivalence of categories QCohComm Uop ≃Aff U. The inverse
functor sends an afﬁne morphism h: X →U to the quasi-coherent sheaf of com-
mutative algebras h∗OX.
There is a morphism of ﬁbered categories
(QCohComm/S)cart −→(Aff/S)cart
that sends a an object A of QCohComm U to the afﬁne morphism S pec A →U.
Let ( f, α): (U, A) →(V, B) be an arrow in (QCohComm/S)cart; f : U →V is a
morphism of S-schemes, α: A ≃f ∗B an isomorphism of sheaves of OU-modules.
Then α−1 gives an isomorphism S pecU A ≃S pecU f ∗B = U ×V S pecV B of schemes


PDF PAGE 94
94
4. STACKS
over U, and the composite of this isomorphism with the projection U ×V S pecV B →
S pecV B gives an arrow from S pecU A →U to S pecV B →V in (Aff/S)cart.
If we restrict the morphism to a functor
(QCohComm/S)cart(U) −→(Aff/S)cart(U)
for some S-scheme U we obtain an equivalence of categories; hence this morphism
is an equivalence of ﬁbered categories over (Sch/S), by Proposition 3.36. Since
(QCoh/S)cart is a stack, by Theorem 4.29 and Proposition 4.20 (i), we see from
Proposition 4.12 that (Aff/S)cart is also a stack, and this concludes the proof of
Theorem 4.33.
The following corollary will be used in §4.3.3.
Corollary 4.34. Let P →U be a morphism of schemes, {Ui →U} an fpqc cover. For
each i set Pi
def
= Ui ×U P and Pij
def= Uij ×U P. Suppose that for each i we have a closed
subscheme Xi of Pi, with the property that for each pair of indices i and j the inverse images
of Xi and Xj in Pij, through the ﬁrst and second projection respectively, coincide. Then
there is a unique closed subscheme of P whose inverse image in Pi coincides with Xi for
each i.
PROOF. We have that {Pi →P} is an fpqc cover, and Pij = Pi ×P Pj. The
pullbacks pr∗
2 Xj and pr∗
1 Xi to Pij coincide as subschemes of Pij, and this yields
a canonical isomorphism φij pr∗
2 Xj ≃pr∗
1 Xi. The cocycle condition is automati-
cally satisﬁed, because any two morphisms of Pijk-schemes that are embedded in
Pijk automatically coincide. Hence there is an afﬁne morphism X →P that pulls
back to Xi →Pi for each i; and this morphism is a closed embedding, because of
Proposition 2.36.
Uniqueness is clear, because two closed subschemes of P that are isomorphic
as P-schemes are in fact equal.
♠
4.3.2. The base change theorem. For the next result we are going to need a
particular case of the base change theorem for quasi-coherent sheaves.
Suppose that we have a commutative diagram of schemes
(4.3.1)
X
f
/
ξ

Y
η

U
φ
/ V
and a sheaf of OY-modules L. Then there exists a natural base change homomor-
phism of OU-modules
β f ,φ(L): φ∗η∗L −→ξ∗f ∗L
that is deﬁned as follows. First of all, start from the natural adjunction homo-
morphism L →f∗f ∗L (this is the homomorphism that corresponds to idf ∗L in
the natural adjunction isomorphism HomY(L, f∗φ∗L) ≃HomX( f ∗L, f ∗L)). This
gives a homomorphism of OV-modules
η∗L −→η∗f∗f ∗L = φ∗ξ∗f ∗L.
Then β f ,φ(L) corresponds to this homomorphism under the adjunction isomor-
phism
HomU(φ∗η∗L, ξ∗f ∗L) ≃HomV(η∗L, φ∗ξ∗f ∗L).


PDF PAGE 104
104
4. STACKS
If π : X →Y is an invariant arrow and f : Y′ →Y is an arrow, there is an
induced action of G on Y′ ×Y X; this is the unique action that makes the ﬁrst pro-
jection pr1 : Y′ ×Y X →Y′ invariant, and the second projection pr2 : Y′ ×Y X →X
G-equivariant. In functorial terms, if U is an object of C, g ∈G(U), x ∈X(U)
and y′ ∈Y′(U) are elements with the same image in Y(U), we have g · (y′, x) =
(y′, g · x).
The ﬁrst example of a torsor is the trivial torsor. For each object Y of C, consider
the product G × Y. This has an action of G, deﬁned by the obvious formula
g · (h, y) = (gh, y)
for all objects U of C, all g and h in G(U) and all y in Y(U).
More generally, a trivial torsor consists of an object X of C with a left action of
G, together with an invariant arrow f : X →Y, such that there is a G-equivariant
isomorphism φ: G × Y ≃X making the diagram
G × Y
φ
/
pr2
$H
H
H
H
X
f
 
Y
commute. (The isomorphism itself is not part of the data, only its existence is
required.)
A G-torsor is an object X of C with an action of G and an invariant arrow
π : X →Y that locally on Y is a trivial torsor. Here is the precise deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 4.42. A G-torsor in C consists of an object X of C with an action of G
and an invariant arrow π : X →Y, such that there exists a covering {Yi →Y} of Y
with the property that for each i the arrow pr1 : Yi ×Y X →Yi is a trivial torsor.
Here is an important characterization of torsors. Notice that every time we
have an action α: G × X →X of G on an object X and an invariant arrow f : X →
Y, we get an arrow δα : G × X →X ×Y X, deﬁned as a natural transformation
by the formula (g, x) 7→(gx, x) for any object U of C and any g ∈G(U) and
x ∈X(U).
Proposition 4.43. Let X be an object of C with an action of G. An invariant arrow
π : X →Y is a G-torsor if and only if
(i) There exists a covering {Yi →Y} such that every arrow Yi →Y factors through
π : X →Y, and
(ii) the arrow δα : G × X →X ×Y X is an isomorphism.
Notice that part (i) says that X →Y is a covering in the saturation of the
topology of C (Deﬁnition 2.52).
PROOF. Assume that the two conditions are satisﬁed. The arrow δα is imme-
diately checked to be G-equivariant; hence the pullback X ×Y X →X of π through
the covering π : X →Y is a trivial torsor, and therefore π : X →Y is a G-torsor.
Conversely, take a torsor π : X →Y. First of all, assume that π : X →Y is a
trivial torsor, and ﬁx a G-equivariant isomorphism φ: G × Y ≃X over Y. There
is a section Y →X of π : X →Y, so condition (i) is satisﬁed for the covering
{Y = Y}.


PDF PAGE 105
4.4. DESCENT ALONG TORSORS
105
To verify condition (ii), notice that δα can be written as the composite of iso-
morphisms
G × X
idG×φ−1
−−−−−→G × G × Y ≃(G × Y) ×Y (G × Y)
φ×φ
−−→X ×Y X,
where the isomorphism is in the middle is deﬁned as a natural transformation by
the rule (g, h, y) 7→
 (g, y), (h, y)

for any object U of C and any g, h ∈G(U) and
y ∈Y(U).
In the general case, when π : X →Y is not necessarily trivial, the result follows
from the previous case and the following lemma.
Lemma 4.44. Let C be a subcanonical site,
X
f
/
?????
Y
     S
a commutative diagram in C. Suppose that there is a covering {Si →S} such that the
induced arrows
idSi × f : Si ×S X −→Si ×S Y
are isomorphisms. Then f is also an isomorphism.
PROOF. The site (C/S) is subcanonical (Proposition 2.59): this means that we
can substitute (C/S) for C, and suppose that S is a terminal object of C.
By Yoneda’s lemma, it is enough to show that for any object U of C the function
fU : X(U) →Y(U) induced by f is a bijection. First of all, assume that the arrow
U →S factors through some Si. By hypothesis idSi × f : Si × X →Si × Y is an
isomorphism, hence idSi(U) × fU : Si(U) × X(U) →Si(U) × Y(U) is a bijection. If
Si(U) ̸= ∅it follows that fU is a bijection.
For the general case we use the hypothesis that C is subcanonical. If U is
arbitrary, and we set Ui
def= Si × U, then {Ui →U} is a covering. Hence we have a
diagram of sets
X(U)
/
fU

∏i X(Ui)
∏i fUi

// ∏ij Y(Uij)
∏ij fUij

Y(U)
/ ∏i X(Ui)
// ∏ij Y(Uij)
in which the rows are equalizers, because C is subcanonical. On the other hand
each arrow Ui →S and Uij →S factors through Si, so fUi and fUij are bijections.
It follows that fU is a bijection, as required.
♠
Consider the arrow δα : G × X →X ×Y X, and choose a covering {Yi →Y}
such that for each i the pullbacks Xi
def= Yi ×Y X are trivial as torsors over Yi. Denote
by αi : G × Xi →Xi the induced action; then δαi : G × Xi →Xi ×Yi Xi is an isomor-
phism. On the other hand there are standard isomorphisms (G × X) ×Y Yi ≃


PDF PAGE 106
106
4. STACKS
G × Xi and (X ×Y X) ×Y Yi ≃Xi ×Yi Xi, and the diagram
(G × X) ×Y Yi
δα×idYi /
pr1

(X ×Y X) ×Y Yi
pr1

G × Xi
δαi
/ Xi ×Yi Xi
commutes. Hence δα × idYi is an isomorphism for all i, and it follows that δα is an
isomorphism.
♠
Example 4.45. Let K ⊆L be a ﬁnite Galois extensions, with Galois group G.
Denote by GK the discrete group scheme G × Spec K →Spec K associated with
G, as in §2.2.2. The action of G on L deﬁnes an action α: GK ×
Spec K Spec L =
G × Spec L →Spec L of GK on Spec L (Proposition 2.22), which leaves the mor-
phism Spec L →Spec K invariant. (For convenience we will write the action of G
on L on the right, so that the resulting action of G on Spec L is naturally written as
a left action.)
By the primitive element theorem, L is generated as an extension of K by
a unique element u; denote by f ∈K[x] its minimal polynomial.
Then L =
K[x]/
 f(x)

. The group G acts on the roots of f simply transitively, so f(x) =
∏g∈G(x −ug) ∈L[x].
The morphism
δα : GK × Spec L −→Spec L ×Spec K Spec L = Spec(L ⊗K L)
corresponds to the homomorphism of K-algebras L ⊗K L →LG deﬁned as
a ⊗b 7→
 (ag)b

g∈G,
where by LG we mean the product of copies of L indexed by G. We have an iso-
morphism
L ⊗K L = K[x]/
 ∏
g∈G
(x −ug)
 ⊗K L ≃L[x]/
 ∏
g∈G
(x −ug)

;
by the Chinese remainder theorem, the projection
L[x]/
 ∏
g∈G
(x −ug)
 −→∏
g∈G
L[x]/(x −ug) ≃LG
is an isomorphism. Thus we get an isomorphism L ⊗K L ≃LG, that is easily seen to
coincide with the homomorphism corresponding to δα. Thus δα is an isomorphism;
and since Spec L →Spec K is ´etale, this shows that Spec L is GK-torsor over Spec K.
Here is our main result.
Theorem 4.46. Let X →Y be a G-torsor, and F →C a stack. Then there exists
a canonical equivalence of categories between F(Y) and the category of G-equivariant
objects F G(X) deﬁned in §3.8.
PROOF. Because of Proposition 4.16, we have an equivalence of F(Y) with
F(X →Y), so it is enough to produce an equivalence between F(X →Y) and
F G(X).
For this we need the isomorphism δα : G × X ≃X ×Y X deﬁned above, and
also the one deﬁned in the next Lemma.
