PDF PAGE 169
MORE ON MORPHISMS
169
For this we first use Limits, Lemma 10.1 to obtain the diagram base changing
to the previous diagram. Then we use Limits, Lemmas 8.10, 8.9, 8.3, 4.13, 8.12,
13.1, and 8.15 to obtain ν finite, surjective, j open immersion, Ti →S finite étale,
Yi →T smooth, Y i →Ti proper and smooth. Since Yi cannot be empty, since
smooth morphisms are open, and since Ti →S is finite étale, after shrinking S we
may assume Yi →Ti is surjective. Finally, the fibre of Y i →Ti over the unique
point ηi = Spec(ki) of Ti lying over η is geometrically connected. Hence by another
shrinking we may assume the same thing is true for all fibres, see Lemma 53.8.
It remains to prove the existence of an open W ⊂X satisfying (a), (b), and (c).
Since νη : ` Yi,η →Xη is the normalization morphism, we know by Varieties,
Lemma 27.1 there exists a dense open Wη ⊂Xη such that ν−1(Wη) →Wη is equal
to the inclusion of the reduction of Wη into Wη. Let W ⊂X be a quasi-compact
open whose fibre over η is the open Wη we just found. After replacing A = Γ(S, OS)
by another localization we may assume ν−1(W) →W is a closed immersion, see
Limits, Lemma 8.5.
Since ν is also surjective we conclude ν−1(W) →W is a
thickening. Set Wi = ν−1(W)∩Yi. Shrinking S once more we can assume Wi →Ti
is surjective for all i (same argument as above). Then we find that Wi ⊂Yi is dense
in all fibres of Yi →Ti as Yi →Ti has geometrically irreducible fibres. Since ν is
finite and surjective, it then follows that W = ν(ν−1(W)) is dense in all fibres of
X →S too.
□
57. Descending separated locally quasi-finite morphisms
02W7
In this section we show that “separated locally quasi-finite morphisms satisfy de-
scent for fppf-coverings”. See Descent, Definition 36.1 for terminology. This is in
the marvellous (for many reasons) paper by Raynaud and Gruson hidden in the
proof of [GR71, Lemma 5.7.1]. It can also be found in [Mur95], and [ABD+66, Ex-
posé X, Lemma 5.4] under the additional hypothesis that the morphism is locally
of finite presentation. Here is the formal statement.
Lemma 57.1.
02W8
Let S be a scheme. Let {Xi →S}i∈I be an fppf covering, see
Topologies, Definition 7.1. Let (Vi/Xi, φij) be a descent datum relative to {Xi →
S}. If each morphism Vi →Xi is separated and locally quasi-finite, then the descent
datum is effective.
Proof. Being separated and being locally quasi-finite are properties of morphisms
of schemes which are preserved under any base change, see Schemes, Lemma 21.12
and Morphisms, Lemma 21.13. Hence Descent, Lemma 36.2 applies and it suffices
to prove the statement of the lemma in case the fppf-covering is given by a single
{X →S} flat surjective morphism of finite presentation of affines.
Say X =
Spec(A) and S = Spec(R) so that R →A is a faithfully flat ring map. Let (V, φ)
be a descent datum relative to X over S and assume that π : V →X is separated
and locally quasi-finite.


PDF PAGE 170
MORE ON MORPHISMS
170
Let W 1 ⊂V be any affine open. Consider W = pr1(φ(W 1 ×S X)) ⊂V . Here is a
picture
W 1 ×S X
/

&
φ(W 1 ×S X)

w
V ×S X
φ
/
&

X ×S V
x

X ×S X
1
/
pr0

X ×S X
pr1

W 1
/ V
/ X
X
V
o
W
o
Ok, and now since X →S is flat and of finite presentation it is universally open
(Morphisms, Lemma 26.10). Hence we conclude that W is open. Moreover, it is
also clearly the case that W is quasi-compact, and W 1 ⊂W. Moreover, we note
that φ(W ×S X) = X ×S W by the cocycle condition for φ. Hence we obtain a
new descent datum (W, φ′) by restricting φ to W ×S X. Note that the morphism
W →X is quasi-compact, separated and locally quasi-finite. This implies that it
is separated and quasi-finite by definition. Hence it is quasi-affine by Lemma 43.2.
Thus by Descent, Lemma 38.1 we see that the descent datum (W, φ′) is effective.
In other words, we find that there exists an open covering V = S Wi by quasi-
compact opens Wi which are stable for the descent morphism φ. Moreover, for
each such quasi-compact open W ⊂V the corresponding descent data (W, φ′) is
effective. This means the original descent datum is effective by glueing the schemes
obtained from descending the opens Wi, see Descent, Lemma 35.13.
□
58. Relative finite presentation
05GX
Let R →A be a finite type ring map. Let M be an A-module. In More on Algebra,
Section 82 we defined what it means for M to be finitely presented relative to R.
We also proved this notion has good localization properties and glues. Hence we
can define the corresponding global notion as follows.
Definition 58.1.
05H1
Let f : X →S be a morphism of schemes which is locally of
finite type. Let F be a quasi-coherent OX-module. We say F is finitely presented
relative to S or of finite presentation relative to S if there exists an affine open
covering S = S Vi and for every i an affine open covering f −1(Vi) = S
j Uij such
that F(Uij) is a OX(Uij)-module of finite presentation relative to OS(Vi).
Note that this implies that F is a finite type OX-module. If X →S is just locally
of finite type, then F may be of finite presentation relative to S, without X →S
being locally of finite presentation. We will see that X →S is locally of finite
presentation if and only if OX is of finite presentation relative to S.
Lemma 58.2.
09T7
Let f : X →S be a morphism of schemes which is locally of finite
type. Let F be a quasi-coherent OX-module. The following are equivalent
(1) F is of finite presentation relative to S,
(2) for every affine opens U ⊂X, V ⊂S with f(U) ⊂V the OX(U)-module
F(U) is finitely presented relative to OS(V ).
