PDF PAGE 18
PROPERTIES OF ALGEBRAIC SPACES
18
finite étale also. It follows that RW is affine. Thus we see that W/RW is a scheme,
by Groupoids, Proposition 23.9. On the other hand, W/RW is an open subspace
of X by Spaces, Lemma 10.2 and it contains x by construction.
□
We will improve the following proposition to the case of decent algebraic spaces in
Decent Spaces, Theorem 10.2.
Proposition 13.3.
06NH
Let S be a scheme. Let X be an algebraic space over S. If X
is Zariski locally quasi-separated (for example if X is quasi-separated), then there
exists a dense open subspace X′ of X which is a scheme. More precisely, every
point x ∈|X| of codimension 0 on X is contained in X′.
Proof. The question is local on X by Lemma 13.1. Thus by Lemma 6.6 we may
assume that there exists an affine scheme U and a surjective, quasi-compact, étale
morphism U →X. Moreover U →X is separated (Lemma 6.4). Set R = U ×X U
and denote s, t : R →U the projections as usual. Then s, t are surjective, quasi-
compact, separated, and étale. Hence s, t are also quasi-finite and have finite fibres
(Morphisms, Lemmas 37.6, 21.9, and 21.10). By Morphisms, Lemma 52.1 for every
η ∈U which is the generic point of an irreducible component of U, there exists
an open neighbourhood V ⊂U of η such that s−1(V ) →V is finite. By Descent,
Lemma 23.25 being finite is fpqc (and in particular étale) local on the target.
Hence we may apply More on Groupoids, Lemma 6.4 which says that the largest
open W ⊂U over which s is finite is R-invariant. By the above W contains every
generic point of an irreducible component of U. The restriction RW of R to W
equals RW = s−1(W) = t−1(W) (see Groupoids, Definition 19.1 and discussion
following it). By construction sW , tW : RW →W are finite étale. Consider the
open subspace X′ = W/RW ⊂X (see Spaces, Lemma 10.2). By construction the
inclusion map X′ →X induces a bijection on points of codimension 0. This reduces
us to Lemma 13.2.
□
14. Obtaining a scheme
07S5
We have used in the previous section that the quotient U/R of an affine scheme U
by an equivalence relation R is a scheme if the morphisms s, t : R →U are finite
étale. This is a special case of the following result.
Proposition 14.1.
07S6
Let S be a scheme. Let (U, R, s, t, c) be a groupoid scheme
over S. Assume
(1) s, t : R →U finite locally free,
(2) j = (t, s) is an equivalence relation, and
(3) every nonempty closed subset Z of U contains a point u whose R-equivalence
class t(s−1({u})) is contained in an affine open of U 3.
Then there exists a finite locally free morphism U →M of schemes over S such
that R = U ×M U and such that M represents the quotient sheaf U/R in the fppf
topology.
Proof. By assumption (3) and Groupoids, Lemma 24.1 we can find an open cover-
ing U = S Ui such that each Ui is an R-invariant affine open of U. Set Ri = R|Ui.
3Let E ⊂U be the set of points u such that t(s−1({u})) is contained in an affine open of U.
Condition (3) holds if E = U, or if every finite type point of U is in E, or if every u ∈U specializes
to a point of E.
