
PDF PAGE 1
arXiv:math/0504020v1  [math.AG]  1 Apr 2005
Contemporary Mathematics
The Picard scheme
Steven L. Kleiman
Abstract. We develop in detail most of the theory of the Picard scheme
that Grothendieck sketched in two Bourbaki talks and in commentaries on
them. Also, we review in brief much of the rest of the theory developed by
Grothendieck and by others. But we begin with a historical introduction.
Contents
1.
Introduction
1
2.
The several Picard functors
16
3.
Relative eﬀective divisors
22
4.
The Picard scheme
26
5.
The connected component of the identity
36
6.
The torsion component of the identity
52
Appendix A.
Answers to all the exercises
62
Appendix B.
Basic intersection theory
73
References
81
1. Introduction
On any ringed space X, the isomorphism classes of invertible sheaves form a
group; it is denoted by Pic(X), and called the (absolute) Picard group. Suppose X
is a “projective variety”; in other words, X is an integral scheme that is projective
over an algebraically closed ﬁeld k. Then, as is proved in these notes, the group
Pic(X) underlies a natural k-scheme, which is a disjoint union of quasi-projective
schemes, and the operations of multiplying and of inverting are given by k-maps.
This scheme is denoted by PicX/k, and called the Picard scheme. It is reduced in
characteristic zero, but not always in positive characteristic. When X varies in an
algebraic family, correspondingly, PicX/k does too.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 14K30; Secondary 14C20, 14C17, 14-03.
Key words and phrases. Picard scheme, Picard functor, relative divisor, intersection theory.
The author is grateful to Allen Altman, Ethan Cotterill, Eduardo Esteves, Rebecca Lehman,
Jean-Pierre Serre, and Angelo Vistoli for their many valuable comments on earlier versions of
these notes.
c
⃝0000 (copyright holder)
1


PDF PAGE 2
2
S. L. KLEIMAN
The Picard scheme was introduced in 1962 by Grothendieck. He sketched his
theory in two Bourbaki talks, nos. 232 and 236, which were reprinted along with
his commentaries in [FGA]. But Grothendieck advanced an old subject, which was
actively being developed by many others at the time. Nevertheless, Grothendieck’s
theory was revolutionary, both in concept and in technique.
In order to appreciate Grothendieck’s contribution fully, we have to review the
history of the Picard scheme. Reviewing this history serves as well to introduce and
to motivate Grothendieck’s theory. Furthermore, the history is rich and fascinating,
and it is a signiﬁcant part of the history of algebraic geometry.
So let us now review the history of the Picard scheme up to 1962. We need only
summarize and elaborate on scattered parts of Brigaglia, Ciliberto, and Pedrini’s
article [BCP] and of the author’s article [Kl04]. Both articles give many precise
references to the original sources and to the secondary literature; so few references
are given here.
The Picard scheme has roots in the 1600s. Over the course of that century, the
Calculus was developed, through the eﬀorts of many individuals, in order to design
lenses, to aim cannons, to make clocks, to hang cables, and so on. Thus interest
arose in the properties of functions appearing as indeﬁnite integrals.
Notably, in 1694, James Bernoulli analyzed the way rods bend, and was led to
introduce the “lemniscate,” a ﬁgure eight with equation (x2 + y2)2 = a2(x2 −y2)
where a is nonzero. In polar coordinates, he found the arc length s to be given by
s =
Z r
0
a2 dr
√
a4 −r4 .
He surmised that s can not be expressed in terms of the elementary functions.
Similar integrals had already arisen in attempts to rectify elliptical orbits; so these
integrals became known as “elliptic integrals.”
In 1698, James’s brother, John, recalled there are algebraic relations among the
arguments of sums and diﬀerences of logarithms and of the inverse trigonometric
functions. Then he showed that, similarly, given two arcs from the origin on the
cubical parabola y = x3, their lengths diﬀer by the length of a certain third such
arc. And he posed the problem of ﬁnding more cases of this phenomenon.
Sure enough, between 1714 and 1720, Fagnano found, in an ad hoc manner,
similar relations for the cords and arcs of ellipses, hyperbolas, and lemniscates. In
turn, Fagnano’s work led Euler in 1757 to discover the “addition formula”
Z x1
0
dx
√
1 −x4 ±
Z x2
0
dx
√
1 −x4 =
Z x3
0
dx
√
1 −x4
where the variables x1, x2, x3 must satisfy the symmetric relation
x4
1x4
2x4
3 + 2x4
1x2
2x2
3 + 2x2
1x4
2x2
3 + 2x2
1x2
2x4
3
+ x4
1 + x4
2 + x4
3 −2x2
1x2
2 −2x2
1x2
3 −2x2
2x2
3 = 0.
In 1759, Euler generalized this formula to some other elliptic integrals. Speciﬁcally,
Euler found the sum or diﬀerence of two to be equal to a certain third plus an
elementary function.
Moreover, he expressed regret that he could handle only
square roots and fourth powers, but not higher roots or powers.
In 1826, Abel made a great advance: he discovered an addition theorem of
sweeping generality. It concerns certain algebraic integrals, which soon came to be


PDF PAGE 3
THE PICARD SCHEME
3
called “Abelian integrals.” They are of the following form:
ψx :=
Z x
x0
R(x, y) dx
where x is an independent complex variable, R is a rational function, and y = y(x)
is an integral algebraic function; that is, y is the implicit multivalued function
deﬁned by an irreducible equation of the form
f(x, y) := yn + f1(x)yn−1 + · · · + fn(x) = 0
where the fi(x) are polynomials in x.
Let p be the genus of the curve f = 0, and let h1, . . . , hα be rational numbers.
Then Abel’s addition theorem asserts that
h1ψx1 + · · · + hαψxα = v + ψx′
1 + · · · + ψx′
p
where v is an elementary function of the independent variables x1, . . . , xα and where
x′
1, . . . , x′
p are algebraic functions of them. More precisely, v is a complex-linear
combination of one algebraic function of x1, . . . , xα and of logarithms of others;
moreover, x′
1, . . . , x′
p work for every choice of ψx.
Lastly, p is minimal: given
algebraic functions x′
1, . . . , x′
p−1 of x1, . . . , xp, there exists an integral ψx such that,
for any elementary function v,
ψx1 + · · · + ψxp ̸= v + ψx′
1 + · · · + ψx′
p−1.
Abel ﬁnished his 61-page manuscript in Paris, and submitted it in person on
30 October 1826 to the Royal Academy of Sciences, which appointed Cauchy and
Legendre as referees. However, the Academy did not publish it until 1841, long
after Abel’s death from tuberculosis on 6 April 1829.
Meanwhile, Abel feared his manuscript was lost forever. So in Crelle’s Journal,
3 (1828), he summarized his general addition theorem informally. Then he treated
in detail a major special case, that in which f(x, y) := y2 −ϕ(x) where ϕ(x) is a
square-free polynomial of degree d ≥1. In particular, Abel found
p =
(
(d −1)/2,
if d is odd;
(d −2)/2,
if d is even.
Thus, if d ≥5, then p ≥2, and so Euler’s formula does not extend.
With Jacobi’s help, Legendre came to appreciate the importance of this case.
To it, Legendre devoted the third supplement to his long treatise on elliptic inte-
grals, which are recovered when d = 3, 4. For d ≥5, the integrals share many of
the same formal properties. So Legendre termed them “ultra-elliptiques.”
Legendre sent a copy of the supplement to Crelle for review on 24 March 1832,
and Crelle asked Jacobi to review it. Jacobi translated “ultra-elliptiques” by “hy-
perelliptischen,” and the preﬁx “hyper” has stuck. In his cover letter, Legendre
praised Abel’s addition theorem, calling it, in the immortal words of Horace’s Ode
3, XXX.1, “a monument more lasting than bronze” (monumentum aere perennius).
In his review, Jacobi said that the theorem would be a most noble monument were
it to acquire the name Abel’s Theorem. And it did!
Jacobi was inspired to give, a few months later, the ﬁrst of several proofs
of Abel’s Theorem in the hyperelliptic case. Furthermore, he posed the famous
problem, which became known as the “Jacobi Inversion Problem.” He asked, “what,
in the general case, are those functions whose inverses are Abelian integrals, and


PDF PAGE 4
4
S. L. KLEIMAN
what does Abel’s theorem show about them?”
Jacobi solved the inversion problem when d = 5, 6. Namely, he formed
ψx :=
Z x
x0
dx
p
ϕ(x)
and ψ1x :=
Z x
x0
x dx
p
ϕ(x)
,
and he set
ψx + ψy = u and ψ1x + ψ1y = v.
He showed x + y and xy are single-valued functions of u and v with four periods.
Some historians have felt Abel had this inversion in mind, but ran out of time.
At any rate, in 1827, Abel had originated the idea of inverting elliptic integrals,
obtaining what became known as “elliptic functions.” He and Jacobi studied them
extensively. Moreover, Jacobi introduced “theta functions” as an aid in the study;
they were generalized by Riemann in 1857, and used to solve the inversion problem
in arbitrary genus.
Abel’s paper on hyperelliptic integrals ﬁlls twelve pages. Eight are devoted to
a computational proof of a key intermediate result. A half year later, in Crelle’s
Journal, 4 (1829), Abel published a 2-page paper with a conceptual proof of this
result for any Abelian integral ψx. The result says that ψx1 + · · · + ψxµ is equal to
an elementary function v if x1, . . . , xµ are not independent, but are the abscissas
of the variable points of intersection of the curve f = 0 with a second plane curve
that varies in a linear system — although this geometric formulation is Clebsch’s.
In each of the ﬁrst two papers, Abel addressed two more, intermediate ques-
tions: First, when is the sum ψx1+· · ·+ψxµ constant? Second, what is the number
α of xi that can vary independently? Remarkably, the answers involve the genus p.
For hyperelliptic integrals, Abel found ψx1 + · · · + ψxµ is constant if ψx is a
linear combination of the following p integrals:
Z x
x0
dx
p
ϕ(x)
,
Z x
x0
x dx
p
ϕ(x)
, . . . ,
Z x
x0
xp−1 dx
p
ϕ(x)
.
Here x1, . . . , xµ are the abscissas of the variable points of intersection of the curve
y2 = ϕ(x) and the curve θ1(x)y = θ2(x), whose coeﬃcients vary, but θ2(x) and
ϕ(x) retain a ﬁxed common factor ϕ1(x). Furthermore, Abel found
µ −α ≥p;
(1.1)
equality does not always hold, but can be achieved, given d and α, by choosing the
degrees of θ1(x) and ϕ1(x) appropriately.
Suppose µ −α = p. Then
ψx1 + · · · + ψxα = v −(ψxα+1 + · · · + ψxα+p)
where xα+1, . . . , xα+p are algebraic functions of x1, . . . , xα. Similarly, given any
x′
1, . . . , x′
α′, we get
ψx′
1 + · · · + ψx′
α′ + ψxα+1 + · · · + ψxα+p = v′ −(ψx′′
1 + · · · + ψx′′
p).
Subtract this formula from the one above, and set V := v −v′. The result is
ψx1 + · · · + ψxα −ψx′
1 −· · · −ψx′
α′ = V + ψx′′
1 + · · · + ψx′′
p,
namely, the addition theorem with hi = ±1. This result is essentially Abel’s main
theorem on hyperelliptic integrals.
In his Paris manuscript, Abel addressed the two intermediate questions for an
arbitrary f. However, his computations are more involved, and his results, less


PDF PAGE 5
THE PICARD SCHEME
5
deﬁnitive. He found constancy holds when ψx is of the form
ψx :=
Z x
x0
h(x, y)
∂f/∂y dx
(1.2)
where deg h ≤deg f −3. Also, h must satisfy certain linear conditions; namely, h
must vanish suitably everywhere ∂f/∂y does on the curve f = 0, at ﬁnite distance
and at inﬁnity. Abel took the maximum number of independent h as the genus p.
Furthermore, Abel found that there exists an i ≥0 such that
µ −α = p −i.
(1.3)
This equation does not contradict (1.1) as the two α’s diﬀer; in (1.1), the linear
system of intersections is incomplete, whereas in (1.3), the system is complete.
Abel’s ideas have been clariﬁed and completed over the course of time through
the eﬀorts of many. Doubtless, Riemann made the greatest contribution in his rev-
olutionary 1857 paper on Abelian functions. In his thesis of 1851, he had developed
a way of extending complex analysis to a multivalued function y of a single variable
x by viewing y as a single-valued function on an abstract multisheeted covering of
the x-plane, the “Riemann surface” of y. In 1857, he treated the case where the
surface is compact, and showed this case is precisely the case where y is algebraic.
Riemann deﬁned the genus p topologically, essentially as half the ﬁrst Betti
number of the surface. However, the term “genus” is not Riemann’s, but Clebsch’s.
Clebsch introduced it in 1865 to signal his aim of using p in order to classify algebraic
curves. And he showed that every curve of genus 0 is birationally equivalent to a
line, and every curve of genus 1, to a nonsingular plane cubic.
Also in 1865, Clebsch gave an algebro-geometric formula for the genus p of a
plane curve: if the curve has degree d and, at worst, δ nodes and κ cusps, then
p = (d −1)(d −2)/2 −δ −κ.
The next year, Clebsch and Gordan employed this formula to prove the birational
invariance of p; they determined how d, δ, and κ change.
Plainly, birationally equivalent curves have homeomorphic Riemann surfaces,
and so the same genus p.
But Clebsch was no longer satisﬁed in just showing
the consequences of Riemann’s work. He now wanted to establish the theory of
Abelian integrals on the basis of the algebraic theory of curves as developed by
Cayley, Salmon, and Sylvester. At the time, Riemann’s theory was strange and
suspect; there was, as yet, no theory of manifolds, and no proof of the Dirichlet
principle. Clebsch’s eﬀorts led to a sea change in algebraic geometry, which turned
toward the study of birational invariants.
Riemann deﬁned an integral to be of the “ﬁrst kind” if it is ﬁnite everywhere.
He proved these integrals form a vector space of dimension p. Furthermore, each can
be expressed in the form (1.2) provided the curve f = 0 has, at worst, double points;
if so, the linear conditions on h just require h to vanish at these double points. In
1874, Brill and M. Noether generalized this result to ordinary m-fold points: h must
vanish to order m −1. They termed such h “adjoints.” Meanwhile, starting with
Kronecker in 1858 and Noether in 1871 and continuing through Muhly and Zariski
in 1938, many algebraic geometers developed corresponding ways of reducing the
singularities of a given plane curve by means of birational transformations.
Euler noted the integral
R x
0 dx/
√
1 −x4 has a “modulus of multivaluedness”
like that of the inverse trigonometric functions. Abel noted an arbitrary Abelian


PDF PAGE 6
6
S. L. KLEIMAN
integral has a similar ambiguity, but viewed it as a sort of constant of integration,
and avoided it by keeping the domain small. Riemann clariﬁed the issue completely.
He proved every integral of the ﬁrst kind has 2p “periods,” which are numbers that
generate all possible changes in the value of the integral arising from changes in the
path of integration.
Riemann, in eﬀect, did as follows. He ﬁxed a basis ψ1x, . . . , ψpx of the integrals
of the ﬁrst kind, and he ﬁxed a homology basis of 2p paths. Then, inside the vector
space C p, he formed the lattice L generated by the 2p corresponding p-vectors of
periods. And he proved the quotient is a p-dimensional complex torus
J := C p/L.
Later J was termed the “Jacobian” to honor Jacobi’s work on inversion.
Let C be the curve f = 0, or better, the associated Riemann surface. Let C(µ)
be its µ-fold symmetric product. Riemann, in eﬀect, formed the following map:
Ψµ : C(µ) →J given by Ψµ(x1, . . . , xµ) =
 µ
X
i=1
ψ1xi, . . . ,
µ
X
i=1
ψpxi

.
This map Ψµ is rather important. It has been called the “Abel–Jacobi map” and
the “Abel map.” The latter name is historically more correct and shorter, so better.
Riemann, in eﬀect, studied the ﬁbers of the Abel map Ψµ. He proved that, if
two divisors x1 + · · · + xµ and x′
1 + · · · + x′
µ are linearly equivalent, then
Ψµ(x1, . . . , xµ) = Ψµ(x′
1, . . . , x′
µ).
Riemann called this result “Abel’s Addition Theorem,” and cited Jacobi’s 1832
proof of it in the hyperelliptic case.
The converse of this result holds too.
But Abel did not recognize it, and
it lies, at best, between the lines of Riemann’s paper.
The converse was ﬁrst
explicitly stated by Clebsch in 1864, and ﬁrst proved in full generality some time
later by Weierstrass. In 1913, in Weyl’s celebrated book on Riemann surfaces, Weyl
combined the result and its converse under the heading of Abel’s Theorem. Ever
since then, most mathematicians have done the same, even though Weyl explained
it is not historically correct to do so.
Together, the above result and its converse imply the ﬁber Ψ−1
µ Ψµ(x1, . . . , xµ)
is the complete linear system determined by x1 + · · · + xµ. Its dimension is just
Abel’s α, the number of xi that can vary independently in the system. Furthermore,
in eﬀect, Riemann rediscovered Abel’s formula (1.3), and in 1864, Roch identiﬁed
i as the number of independent adjoints vanishing on x1, . . . , xµ. In 1874, Brill
and Noether, inspired by Clebsch, gave the ﬁrst algebro-geometric treatment of the
formula, whose statement they named the “Riemann–Roch Theorem.”
Finally, Riemann treated the inversion problem. In eﬀect, he proved that the
Abel map Ψp is biholomorphic on a certain saturated Zariski open subset U ⊂C(p);
namely, U is the complement of the image of C(p−1) in C(p) under the map
(x2, . . . , xp) 7→(x0, x2, . . . , xp).
The inverse map ΨpU →U can be expressed using the coordinate functions on
C(p), so in terms of functions on ΨpU. Since J := C p/L, these functions can be
lifted to an open subset of C p, and then continued to meromorphic functions on
C p with 2p periods. Riemann termed these special functions “Abelian functions.”
Two years later, in 1859, Riemann proved that every meromorphic function F


PDF PAGE 7
THE PICARD SCHEME
7
in p variables has at most 2p independent period vectors. Those F with exactly 2p
soon became known as “Abelian functions.” They were studied by many, including
Weierstrass, Frobenius, and Poincar´e. In particular, in 1869, Weierstrass observed
that not every F comes from a curve.
Form the set K of all “Abelian functions” whose group of periods contains a
given lattice L in C p of rank 2p. It turns out K is a ﬁeld of transcendence degree
p over C. Hence K is the ﬁeld of rational functions on a p-dimensional projective
algebraic variety A, which is parameterized on a Zariski open set by p of them.
There are many such A, and all were called “Abelian varieties” at ﬁrst. In 1919,
Lefschetz proved there is a distinguished A, whose underlying set can be identiﬁed
with C p/L in a natural way, and he restricted the term “Abelian variety” to it.
Not only do the points of an Abelian variety A form a group, but the operations
of adding and of inverting are given by polynomials. Thus A is a complete algebraic
group, or an “Abelian variety” in Weil’s sense of 1948.
Weil proved each such
abstract Abelian variety is commutative. Earlier, in 1889, Picard had, in eﬀect,
proved this commutativity in the case of a surface.
Every connected projective algebraic group is parameterized globally by Abel-
ian functions with a common lattice of periods. This fact was proved by Picard
for surfaces in 1889 and, assuming the group is commutative, in any dimension in
1895. His proof was completed at certain points of analysis in 1903 by Painlev´e.
Thus the two deﬁnitions of Abelian variety agree, Lefschetz’s and Weil’s; however,
Weil worked in arbitrary characteristic.
In the case of C above, its Jacobian J is thus an Abelian variety. Moreover, J
is the quotient of C(µ) for any µ ≥p by linear equivalence. So J and Ψµ are deﬁned
by integrals, but given by polynomials! And addition on J corresponds to addition
of divisors. Therefore, J and Ψµ can be constructed algebro-geometrically just by
forming the quotient. Severi attributed this construction to Castelnuovo.
In 1905, Castelnuovo generalized the construction to surfaces. To set the stage,
he reviewed the case of curves, calling it very well known (notissimo). His work is
a milestone in the history of irregular surfaces, which began in 1868.
In 1868, Clebsch generalized Abel’s formula (1.2) to a surface f(x, y, z) = 0
with ordinary singularities and no point at inﬁnity on the z-axis; in other words,
f = 0 is a general projection of a smooth surface. Clebsch showed that every double
integral of the ﬁrst kind is of the form
Z Z h(x, y, z)
∂f/∂z
dx dy
where deg h = deg f −4 and h vanishes when ∂f/∂z does. The number of indepen-
dent integrals became known as the “geometric genus” and denoted by pg.
In 1870, M. Noether found an algebro-geometric proof that pg is a birational
invariant, as conjectured by Clebsch.
In 1871, Cayley found a formula for the
expected number of independent h, later called the “arithmetic genus” and denoted
by pa. He observed that, if f = 0 is a ruled surface over a base curve of genus p,
then pa = −p, but pg = 0. Later in 1871, Zeuthen used Cayley’s formula to give
an algebro-geometric proof that pa too is a birational invariant.
In 1875, Noether explained the unexpected discrepancy between pg and pa: the
vanishing conditions on h need not be independent; in any case, pg ≥pa. He noted
that, if the surface f = 0 in 3-space is smooth or rational, then pg = pa. It was
expected that equality usually holds; so when it did, f = 0 was termed “regular.”


PDF PAGE 8
8
S. L. KLEIMAN
The diﬀerence pg −pa gives a quantitative measure of the failure of f = 0 to be
regular; so pg −pa was termed its “irregularity.”
In 1884, Picard studied, on the surface f = 0, simple integrals
Z
P(x, y, z) dx +
Z
Q(x, y, z) dy
that are closed, or ∂P/∂y = ∂Q/∂x; they became known as “Picard integrals.”
And q was used to denote the number of independent Picard integrals of the ﬁrst
kind. Picard noted that, if f = 0 is smooth, then q = 0. In 1894, Humbert proved
that, if q = 0, then every algebraic system of curves is contained in a linear system.
Inspired by Humbert’s result, in 1896, Castelnuovo proved that, if pg −pa = 0,
then every algebraic system of curves on f = 0 is contained in a linear system under
a certain restriction. In 1899, Enriques removed the restriction. For a modern ver-
sion of this result and of its converse, which together characterize regular surfaces,
see Exercises 5.16 and 5.17.
In 1897, Castelnuovo ﬁxed a linear system of curves on the surface f = 0, and
studied the “characteristic” linear system cut out on a general member by the other
members. Let δ be the amount, termed the “deﬁciency,” by which the dimension of
the characteristic system falls short of the dimension of its complete linear system.
Castelnuovo proved that
δ ≤pg −pa,
and equality holds for the system cut out by the surfaces of suitably high degree.
In February 1904, Severi extended Castelnuovo’s work. Severi took a complete
algebraic system of curves, without repetition, on the surface f = 0, say with
parameter space Σ of dimension R. Let σ ∈Σ be a general point, and Cσ the
corresponding curve. Say Cσ moves in a complete linear system of dimension r.
Now, to each tangent direction at σ ∈Σ, Severi associated, in an injective fashion, a
member of the complete characteristic system on Cσ. Thus he got an R-dimensional
“characteristic” linear subsystem. The complete system has dimension r+δ. Hence,
R ≤r + pg −pa.
A few months later, Enriques and, shortly afterward, Severi gave proofs that,
if Cσ is suﬃciently positive, then equality holds above; in other words, then the
characteristic system of Σ is complete. Both proofs turned out to have serious gaps,
as Severi himself observed in 1921. Meanwhile, in 1910, Poincar´e gave an analytic
construction of a family with R = pg −pa and r = 0.
It follows formally, by
means of the Riemann–Roch Theorem for surfaces, that whenever Cσ is suﬃciently
positive, the characteristic system is complete. After Severi’s criticism, it became
a major open problem to ﬁnd a purely algebro-geometric treatment of this issue.
But see Corollary 5.5 and Remark 5.18: the solution ﬁnally came forty years later
with Grothendieck’s systematic use of nilpotents!
In mid January 1905, Severi proved that pg −pa ≥q and that pg −pa = b −q
where b is the number of independent Picard integrals of the second kind, which
is equal to the ﬁrst Betti number. Simultaneously and independently, Picard too
proved that pg −pa = b −q.
A week later and more fully that May and June, Castelnuovo took the last step
in this direction. He ﬁxed Cσ suﬃciently positive, and formed the quotient, P say, of
Σ modulo linear equivalence. So P is projective, and dim P = pg−pa. Furthermore,
since two suﬃciently positive curves sum to a third, it follows that P is independent


PDF PAGE 9
THE PICARD SCHEME
9
of the choice of Cσ, and is a commutative group variety. Hence P is an Abelian
variety by the general theorem of Picard, completed by Painlev´e, mentioned above.
Hence P is parameterized by dim P Abelian functions. Castelnuovo proved they
induce independent Picard integrals on f = 0.
Therefore, pg −pa ≤q.
Thus
Castelnuovo obtained the Fundamental Theorem of Irregular Surfaces:
dim P = pg −pa = q = b/2.
(1.4)
For a modern discussion of the result, see Remark 5.15 and Exercise 5.16.
In
1905, the term “Abelian variety” was not yet in use, and so, naturally enough,
Castelnuovo termed P the “Picard variety” of the surface f = 0.
Picard also studied Picard integrals of the third kind on the surface f = 0. In
1901, he proved that there is a smallest integer ̺ such that any ̺+1 curves are the
logarithmic curves of some such integral. On the basis this result, in 1905, Severi
proved, in eﬀect, that ̺ is the rank of the group of all curves modulo algebraic
equivalence. In 1952, N´eron proved the result in arbitrary characteristic. So the
group is now called the “N´eron–Severi group,” and ̺ is called the “Picard number.”
In 1908 and 1910, Severi studied, in eﬀect, the torsion subgroup of the N´eron–
Severi group, notably proving it is ﬁnite. In 1957, Matsusaka proved this ﬁniteness
in arbitrary characteristic. However, there is no special name for this subgroup or
for its order. For more about them and ̺, see Corollary (6.17) and Remark (6.19).
The impetus to work in arbitrary characteristic came from developments in
number theory.
In 1921, E. Artin developed, in his thesis, an analogue of the
Riemann Hypothesis, in eﬀect, for a hyperelliptic curve over a prime ﬁeld of odd
characteristic. In 1929, F. K. Schmidt generalized Artin’s work to all curves over all
ﬁnite ﬁelds, and recast it in the geometric style of Dedekind and Weber. In 1882,
they had viewed a curve as the set of discrete valuation rings in a ﬁnitely generated
ﬁeld of transcendence degree 1 over C, and they had given an abstract algebraic
treatment of the Riemann–Roch Theorem. Schmidt observed that their treatment
works with little change in arbitrary characteristic, and he used the Riemann–Roch
Theorem to prove that Artin’s zeta function satisﬁes a natural functional equation.
In 1936, Hasse proved Artin’s Riemann hypothesis in genus 1 using an analogue
of the theory of elliptic functions.
Then he and Deuring noted that to extend
the proof to higher genus would require developing a theory of correspondences
between curves analogous to that developed by Hurwitz and others. This work
inspired Weil to study the ﬁxed points of the Frobenius correspondence, and led to
his announcement in 1940 and to his two great proofs in 1948 of Artin’s Riemann
hypothesis for the zeta function of an arbitrary curve and also to his proof of the
integrality of his analogue of Artin’s L-functions of 1923 and 1930.
First, in 1946, Weil carefully rebuilt the foundation of algebraic geometry from
scratch. Following in the footsteps of E. Noether, van der Waerden, and Schmidt,
Weil took a variable coeﬃcient ﬁeld of arbitrary characteristic inside a ﬁxed alge-
braically closed coordinate ﬁeld of inﬁnite transcendence degree. Then he formed
“abstract” varieties by patching pieces of projective varieties, and said when these
varieties are “complete.” Finally, he developed a calculus of cycles.
In 1948, Weil published two exciting monographs. In the ﬁrst, he reproved
the Riemann–Roch theorem for (smooth complete) curves, a theorem he regarded
as fundamental (see [We79, I, p. 562, top; II, p. 541, top]). Then he developed
an elementary theory of correspondences between curves, which included Castel-
nuovo’s theorem of 1906 on the positive deﬁniteness of the equivalence defect of a


PDF PAGE 10
10
S. L. KLEIMAN
correspondence. Of course, Castelnuovo’s proof was set over C, but “its translation
into abstract terms was essentially a routine matter once the necessary techniques
had been created,” as Weil put it in his 1954 ICM talk. Finally, Weil derived the
Riemann hypothesis.
In the second monograph, Weil established the abstract theory of Abelian vari-
eties. He constructed the Jacobian J of a curve C of genus p by patching together
copies of an open subset of the symmetric product C(p). Then taking a prime l
diﬀerent from the characteristic, he constructed, out of the points on J of order
ln for all n ≥1, an l-adic representation of the ring of correspondences, equivalent
to the representation on the ﬁrst cohomology group of C. Finally, he proved the
positive deﬁniteness of the trace of this representation, reproved the Riemann hy-
pothesis for the zeta function, and completed the proof of his analogue of Artin’s
conjectured integrality for L-functions of number ﬁelds.
Weil left open two questions: Do a curve and its Jacobian have the same
coeﬃcient ﬁeld? Is every Abelian variety projective? Both questions were soon
answered in the aﬃrmative by Chow and Matsusaka. However, there has remained
some general interest in constructing nonprojective varieties and in ﬁnding criteria
for projectivity. Furthermore, Weil was led in 1956 to study the general question
of descent of the coeﬃcient ﬁeld, and this work in turn inspired Grothendieck’s
general descent theory, which he sketched in [FGA, no. 236].
In 1949, Weil published his celebrated conjectures about the zeta function of a
variety of arbitrary dimension. Weil did not explicitly explain these conjectures in
terms of a hypothetical cohomology theory, but such an explanation lies between
the lines of his paper. Furthermore, it was credited to him explicitly in Serre’s 1956
“Mexico paper” [Sr56, p. 24] and in Grothendieck’s 1958 ICM talk.
In his talk, Grothendieck announced that he had found a new approach to
developing the desired “Weil cohomology.”
He wrote: “it was suggested to me
by the connections between sheaf-theoretic cohomology and cohomology of Galois
groups on the one hand, and the classiﬁcation of unramiﬁed coverings of a variety
on the other . . . , and by Serre’s idea that a ‘reasonable’ algebraic principal ﬁber
space . . . , if it is not locally trivial, should become locally trivial on some covering
unramiﬁed over a given point.” This is the announcement of Grothendieck topology.
In 1960, Grothendieck and Dieudonn´e [EGA I, p. 6] listed the titles of the
chapters they planned to write. The last one, Chapter XIII, is entitled “Coho-
mologie de Weil.” The next-to-last is entitled “Sch´emas ab´eliens et sch´emas de
Picard.” Earlier, at the end of his 1958 ICM talk, Grothendieck had listed ﬁve
open problems; the ﬁfth is to construct the Picard scheme.
In 1950, Weil published a remarkable note on Abelian varieties. For each com-
plete normal variety X of any dimension in any characteristic, he said there ought
to be two associated Abelian varieties, the “Picard” variety P and the “Albanese”
variety A, with certain properties, discussed just below. He explained he had com-
plete proofs for smooth complex X, and “sketches” in general. Soon all was proved.
Weil’s sketches rest on two criteria for linear equivalence, developed in 1906 by
Severi and reformulated in the 1950 note by Weil. He announced proofs of them
in 1952, and published the details in 1954. For some more information, see [Za35,
p. 120] and Remark 5.8. In Weil’s commentaries on his ’54 paper, he wrote: “Ever
since 1949, I considered the construction of an algebraic theory of the Picard variety
as the task of greatest urgency in abstract algebraic geometry.”


PDF PAGE 11
THE PICARD SCHEME
11
The properties are these. First, P parameterizes the linear equivalence classes
of divisors on X. And there exists a map X →A that is “universal” in the sense that
every map from X to an Abelian variety factors through it. In his commentaries on
the note, Weil explained that P had been introduced and named by Castelnuovo;
so historically speaking, it would be justiﬁed to name P after him, but it was
better not to tamper with common usage. By contrast, Weil chose to name A after
Albanese in order to honor his work in 1934 viewing A as a quotient of a symmetric
power of X, although A had been introduced and studied in 1913 by Severi.
Second, if X is an Abelian variety, then X is equal to the Picard variety of P;
so each of X and P is the “dual” of the other. If X is arbitrary, then A and P
are dual Abelian varieties; in fact, the universal map X →A induces the canonical
isomorphism from the Picard variety of A onto P. If X is a curve, then both A and
P coincide with the Jacobian of X, and the universal map X →A is just the Abel
map; in other words, the Jacobian is “autodual.” This autoduality can be viewed
as an algebro-geometric statement of Abel’s theorem and its converse for integrals
of the ﬁrst kind. For some more information, see Remarks 5.24–5.26.
In 1951, Matsusaka gave the ﬁrst algebraic construction of P. However, he
had to extend the ground ﬁeld because he applied Weil’s results: one of the equiv-
alence criteria, and the construction of the Jacobian. Both applications involve
the “generic curve,” which is the section of X by a generic linear space of comple-
mentary dimension. In 1952, Matsusaka gave a diﬀerent construction; it does not
require extending the ground ﬁeld, but requires X to be smooth.
Both constructions are like Castelnuovo’s in that they begin by constructing
a complete algebraic system of suﬃciently positive divisors, and then form the
quotient modulo linear equivalence. To parameterize the divisors, Matsusaka used
the theory of “Chow coordinates,” which was developed by Chow and van der
Waerden in 1938 and reﬁned by Chow contemporaneously. In 1952, Matsusaka
also used this theory to form the quotient. In the same paper, he gave the ﬁrst
construction of A, again using the Jacobian of the generic curve, but he did not
relate A and P.
In 1954, Chow published a construction of the Jacobian similar to Matsusaka’s
second construction of P. Chow had announced it in 1949, and both Weil and
Matsusaka had referred to it in the meantime. In 1955, Chow constructed A and
P by a new procedure; he took the “image” and the “trace” of the Jacobian of
a generic curve. Moreover, he showed that the universal map X →A induces an
isomorphism from the Picard variety of A onto P.
In a course at the University of Chicago, 1954–55, Weil gave a more complete
and elegant treatment, based on the “see-saw principle,” which he adapted from
Severi, and on his own Theorem of the Square and Theorem of the cube. This
treatment became the core of Lang’s 1959 book, “Abelian.Varieties.” The idea is
to construct A ﬁrst using the generic curve, and then to construct P as a quotient
of A modulo a ﬁnite subgroup; thus there is no need for Chow coordinates.
In 1959 and 1960, Nishi and Cartier independently established the duality
between A and P in full generality.
Between 1952 and 1957, Rosenlicht published a remarkable series of papers,
which grew out of his 1950 Harvard thesis. It was supervised by Zariski, who had
studied Abelian functions and algebraic geometry with Castelnuovo, Enriques, and
Severi in Rome from 1921 to 1927. Notably Rosenlicht generalized to a curve with


PDF PAGE 12
12
S. L. KLEIMAN
arbitrary singularities the notions of linear equivalence and diﬀerentials of the ﬁrst
kind. Then he constructed a “generalized Jacobian” over C by integrating and in
arbitrary characteristic by patching. It is not an Abelian variety, but an extension
of the Jacobian of the normalized curve by an aﬃne algebraic group.
Rosenlicht cited Severi’s 1947 monograph, “Funzioni Quasi Abeliane,” where
the generalized Jacobian was discussed for the ﬁrst time, but only for curves with
double points. In turn, Severi traced the history of the corresponding theory of
quasi-Abelian functions back to Klein, Picard, Poincar´e, and Lefschetz.
In 1956, Igusa established the compatibility of specializing a curve with spe-
cializing its generalized Jacobian in arbitrary characteristic when the general curve
is smooth and the special curve has at most one node. Igusa explained that, in
1952, N´eron had studied the total space of such a family of Jacobians, but had
not explicitly analyzed the special ﬁber. Igusa’s approach is, in spirit, like Castel-
nuovo’s, Chow’s, and Matsusaka’s before him and Grothendieck’s after him. But
Grothendieck went considerably further: he proved compatibility with specializa-
tion for a family of varieties of arbitrary dimension with arbitrary singularities,
both in equicharacteristic and in mixed.
In 1960, Chevalley constructed a Picard variety for any normal variety X using
locally principal divisorial cycles. Cartier had already focused on these cycles in his
1958 Paris thesis. But Chevalley said he would call them simply “divisors,” and we
follow suit, although they are now commonly called “Cartier divisors.”
First, Chevalley constructed a “strict” Albanese variety; it is universal for reg-
ular maps (morphisms) into Abelian varieties. Then he took its Picard variety to
be that of X. He noted his Picard and Albanese varieties need not be equal to those
of a desingularization of X. By contrast, Weil’s P and A are birational invariants,
and his universal map X →A is a rational map, which is deﬁned wherever X is
smooth. In 1962, Seshadri generalized Chevalley’s construction to a variety with
arbitrary singularities, thus recovering Rosenlicht’s generalized Jacobian.
Back in 1924, van der Waerden initiated the project of rebuilding the whole
foundation of algebraic geometry on the basis of commutative algebra. His goal was
to develop a rigorous theory of Schubert’s enumerative geometry, as called for by
Hilbert’s ﬁfteenth problem. Van der Waerden drew on Elimination Theory, Ideal
Theory, and Field Theory as developed in the schools of Kronecker, of Dedekind,
and of Hilbert. Van der Waerden originated, notably, the algebraic notion of spe-
cialization as a replacement for the topological notion of continuity.
In 1934, as Zariski wrote his book [Za35], he lost conﬁdence in the clarity,
precision, and completeness of the algebraic geometry of his Italian teachers. He
spent a couple of years studying the algebra of E. Noether and Krull, and aimed to
reduce singularities rigorously. He introduced three algebraic tools: normalization,
valuation theory, and completion. He worked extensively with the rings obtained by
localizing aﬃne coordinate domains at arbitrary primes over arbitrary ﬁelds. And,
in 1944, he put a topology on the set of all valuation rings in a ﬁeld of algebraic
functions, and used the property that any open covering has a ﬁnite subcovering.
In 1949, Weil saw that the “Zariski topology” can be put on his abstract vari-
eties, simplifying the old exposition and suggesting the construction of new objects,
such as locally trivial ﬁber spaces. In his paper of 1950 on Abelian varieties, he
noted that line bundles correspond to linear equivalence classes of divisors, and pre-
dicted that line bundles would play a role in the theory of quasi-Abelian functions.


PDF PAGE 13
THE PICARD SCHEME
13
In 1955, Serre provided abstract algebraic geometry with a very powerful new
tool: sheaf cohomology. Given a variety equipped with the Zariski topology, he
assembled the local rings into the stalks of a “structure” sheaf. Then he developed
a cohomology theory of coherent sheaves, analogous to the one that he and Cartan
and Kodaira and Spencer had just developed in complex analytic geometry, and
had so successfully applied to establish and to generalize previous work on complex
algebraic varieties.
About the same time, a general theory of abstract algebraic geometry was
developed by Chevalley. He did not use sheaves and cohomology, but did work
with what he called “schemes,” obtained by patching “aﬃne schemes”; an aﬃne
scheme is the set of rings obtained by localizing a ﬁnitely generated domain over
an arbitrary ﬁeld. Nevertheless, he soon returned to a more traditional theory of
“varieties” when he worked on the theory of algebraic groups.
In January 1954, Chevalley lectured on schemes at Kyoto University. His lec-
tures inspired Nagata in [Na56] to generalize the theory by replacing the coeﬃcient
ﬁeld by a Dedekind domain. But Nagata used Zariski’s term “model,” not Cheval-
ley’s term “scheme.” Earlier, at the 1950 ICM, Weil had recalled Kronecker’s dream
of an algebraic geometry over the integers; however, Nagata did not cite Weil’s talk,
and likely was not motivated by it.
In the fall of 1955, Chevalley lectured on schemes over ﬁelds at the S´eminaire
Cartan–Chevalley, and Grothendieck was there.
By February 1956 (see [CS01,
p. 32]), he was patching the spectra of arbitrary Noetherian rings, and studying
the cohomology of Cartier’s “quasi-coherent” sheaves. There is good reason for
the added generality: nilpotents allow better handling of higher-order inﬁnites-
imal deformations, of inseparability in positive characteristic, and of passage to
the completion; quasi-coherent sheaves have the technical convenience of coherent
sheaves without their cumbersome ﬁniteness. By October 1958 (see [CS01, p. 63]),
Grothendieck and Dieudonn´e had begun the gigantic program of writing EGA —
rebuilding once again the foundation of algebraic geometry in order to provide a
more ﬂexible framework, more powerful methods, and a more reﬁned theory.
Also in 1958, there appeared two other papers, which discuss objects similar
to Chevalley’s schemes: K¨ahler published a 400 page foundational monograph,
which introduced general base changes, and Chow and Igusa published a four-page
note, which proved the K¨unneth Formula for coherent sheaves. The two works
are mentioned brieﬂy in [CS01, p. 101], in [EGA I, p. 8] and in [EGA G, p. 6];
however, they seem to have had little or no inﬂuence on Grothendieck.
Finally, in 1961–1962, Grothendieck constructed the Hilbert scheme and the
Picard scheme. The construction is a technical masterpiece, showing the tremen-
dous power of Grothendieck’s new tools. In particular, a central role is played by
the theory of ﬂatness. It was introduced by Serre in 1956 as a formal device for
use in comparing algebraic functions and analytic functions. Then Grothendieck
developed the theory extensively, for he recognized that ﬂatness is the technical
condition that best expresses continuity across a family.
Grothendieck [FGA, p. 221-1] saw Hilbert schemes as “destined to replace”
Chow coordinates. However, he [FGA, p. 221-7] had to appeal to the theory of
Chow coordinates for a key ﬁniteness result: in projective space, the subvarieties of
given degree form a bounded family. A few years later, Mumford [Mm66, Lects. 14,
15] gave a simple direct proof of this ﬁniteness; his proof introduced an important


PDF PAGE 14
14
S. L. KLEIMAN
new tool, now known as “Castelnuovo–Mumford” regularity. In a slightly modiﬁed
form, this tool plays a central role in the proofs of the ﬁniteness theorems for the
Picard scheme, which are addressed in Chapter 6 below.
In spirit, Grothendieck’s construction of the Picard scheme is like Castelnuovo’s
and Matsusaka’s. He began with the component Σ of the Hilbert scheme determined
by a suﬃciently positive divisor. Then he formed the quotient; in fact, he did so
twice for diversity. First, he used “quasi-sections”; second, and more elegantly, he
used the Hilbert scheme of Σ.
Grothendieck’s deﬁnition of the two schemes is yet a greater contribution than
his construction of them.
He deﬁned them by their functors of points.
These
schemes are universal parameter spaces; so they receive a map from a scheme T just
when T parameterizes a family of subschemes or of invertible sheaves, respectively,
and this map is unique.
What is a universal family? The answer seems obvious when we use schemes.
But Chow coordinates parameterize positive cycles, not subschemes. And even in
the analytic theory of the Picard variety P, there was some question about the
sense in which P parameterizes divisor classes. Indeed, the American Journal of
Math., 74 (1952), contains three papers on P. First, Igusa constructed P, but left
universality unsettled. Then Weil and Chow settled it with diﬀerent arguments.
A functor of points, or “representable functor,” is not an arbitrary contravariant
functor from schemes to sets. It is determined locally, so is a sheaf. But it suﬃces
to represent a sheaf locally, as the patching is determined. Thus to construct the
Hilbert scheme, the ﬁrst step is to check that the Hilbert functor is, in fact, a sheaf
for the Zariski topology, that is, a “Zariski sheaf.”
The naive Picard functor is not a Zariski sheaf. So the ﬁrst step is to local-
ize it, or form the associated sheaf. This time, the Zariski topology is not ﬁne
enough. However, a representable functor is an fpqc sheaf by a main theorem of
Grothendieck’s descent theory. In practice, it is enough to localize for the ´etale
Grothendieck topology or for the fppf, and these localizations are more convenient
to work with. The localizations of the Picard functor are discussed in Chapter 2.
The next step is to cover the localized Picard functor by representable Zariski
open subfunctors. This step is elementary. But it is technically involved, more
so than any other argument in these notes. It is carried out in the proof of the
main result, Theorem 4.8. Each subfunctor is represented by a quotient of an open
subscheme of the Hilbert scheme. Thus the Picard scheme is constructed.
In sum, Grothendieck’s method of representable functors is like Descartes’s
method of coordinate axes: simple, yet powerful. Here is one hallmark of genius!
In the notes that follow, our primary aim is to develop in detail most of
Grothendieck’s original theory of the Picard scheme basically by ﬁlling in his sketch
in [FGA]. Our secondary aim is to review in brief much of the rest of the theory
developed by Grothendieck and by others. We review the secondary material in a
series of scattered remarks. The remarks refer to each other and to the primary
discussion, but the primary discussion never refers to the remarks. So the remarks
may be safely ignored in a ﬁrst reading.
Notably, the primary discussion does not develop Grothendieck’s method of
“relative representability.” Indeed, the details would take us too far aﬁeld. On the
other hand, were we to use the method, we could obtain certain existence theorems
and ﬁniteness theorems in greater generality by reducing to the cases that we do


PDF PAGE 15
THE PICARD SCHEME
15
handle. Consequently, in Sections 4–6, a number of results just assume the Picard
scheme exists, rather than assume hypotheses guaranteeing it does. However, we
do discuss the method and its applications in Remark 4.18 and in other remarks.
These notes also contain many exercises, which call for working examples and
constructing proofs. Unlike the remarks, these exercises are an integral part of
the primary discussion, which not only is enhanced by them, but also is based in
part on them. Furthermore, the exercises are designed to foster comprehension.
The answers involve no new concepts or techniques. The exercises are meant to be
easy; if a part seems to be hard, then some review and reﬂection may be in order.
However, all the answers are worked out in detail in Appendix A.
These notes assume familiarity with the basic algebraic geometry developed in
Chapters II and III of Hartshorne’s popular textbook [Ha83], and assume familiar-
ity, but to a lesser extent, with the foundational material developed in Grothendieck
and Dieudonn´e’s monumental reference books [EGA I] to [EGA G]. In addition,
these notes assume familiarity with basic Grothendieck topology, descent theory,
and Hilbert-scheme theory, such as that explained on pp. 129–147, 199–201, and
215–221 in Bosch, L¨utkebohmert, and Raynaud’s welcome survey book [BLR];
this material and more was introduced by Grothendieck in three Bourbaki talks,
nos. 190, 212, and 221, which were reprinted in [FGA] and are still worth reading.
Of course, when specialized results are used below, precise references are provided.
Throughout these notes, we work only with locally Noetherian schemes, just
as Grothendieck did in [FGA].
Shortly afterward, Grothendieck promoted the
elimination of this restriction, through a limiting process that reduces the general
case to the Noetherian case. Ever since, it has been common to make this reduction.
However, the process is elementary and straightforward. Using it here would only
be distracting.
Given two locally Noetherian schemes lying over a third, the (ﬁbered) product
is not necessarily locally Noetherian. Consequently, there are minor technical dif-
ﬁculties in working with the fpqc topology on the category of locally Noetherian
schemes. On the other hand, in practice, there is no need to use the fpqc topology.
Therefore, its use has been eliminated from these notes.
Throughout, we work with a ﬁxed separated map of ﬁnite type
f : X →S.
For convenience, when given an S-scheme T , we set
XT := X ×S T
and denote the projection by fT : XT →T . Also, when given a T -scheme T ′ and
given quasi-coherent sheaves N on T and M on XT , we denote the pullback sheaves
by N|T ′ or NT ′ and by M|XT ′ or MT ′.
Given an S-scheme P, we call an S-map T →P a T -point of P, and we denote
the set of all T -points by P(T ). As T varies, the sets P(T ) form a contravariant
functor on the category of S-schemes, called the functor of points of P.
Section 2 introduces and compares the four common relative Picard functors,
the likely candidates for the functor of points of the Picard scheme.
They are
simply the functor T 7→Pic(XT )

Pic(T ) and its associated sheaves in the Zariski
topology, the ´etale topology, and the fppf topology. Section 3 treats relative eﬀective
(Cartier) divisors on X/S and the relation of linear equivalence. We prove these
divisors are parameterized by an open subscheme of the Hilbert scheme of X/S.


PDF PAGE 16
16
S. L. KLEIMAN
Furthermore, we study the subscheme parameterizing the divisors whose ﬁbers are
linearly equivalent, and prove it is of the form P(Q) where Q is a certain coherent
sheaf on S.
Section 4 begins the study of the Picard scheme PicX/S itself. Notably, we
prove Grothendieck’s main theorem: PicX/S exists when X/S is projective and
ﬂat and its geometric ﬁbers are integral. Then we work out Mumford’s example
showing the necessity of the integrality hypothesis. Section 5 studies Pic0
X/S, which
is the union of the connected components of the identity element of the ﬁbers of
Pic0
X/S. In particular, we compute the tangent space at the identity of each ﬁber.
It is remarkable how much we can prove formally about Pic0
X/S. Section 6 proves
the two deeper ﬁniteness theorems. They concern Picτ
X/S, which consists of the
points with a multiple in Pic0
X/S, and Picφ
X/S, whose points represent the invertible
sheaves with a given Hilbert polynomial φ.
Finally, there are two appendices. Appendix A contains detailed answers to
all the exercises. Appendix B develops basic divisorial intersection theory, which is
used freely throughout Section 6. The treatment is short, simple, and elementary.
2. The several Picard functors
Our ﬁrst job is to identify a likely candidate for the functor of points of the
Picard scheme. In fact, there are several reasonable such Picard functors, and each
one is more likely to be representable than the preceding. In this section, they all
are formally introduced and compared.
Definition 2.1. The absolute Picard functor PicX is the functor from the
category of (locally Noetherian) S-schemes T to the category of abelian groups
deﬁned by the formula
PicX(T ) := Pic(XT ).
The absolute Picard functor is a “prepared presheaf” in this sense: given any
family of S-schemes Ti, we have
PicX
 ` Ti

= Q PicX(Ti).
Hence, given a covering family {Ti →T } in the Zariski topology, the ´etale topology,
or any other Grothendieck topology on the category of S-schemes, there is no harm,
when we consider the sheaf associated to PicX, in working simply with the single
map T ′ →T where T ′ := ` Ti. And doing so lightens the notation, making for
easier reading. Therefore, we do so throughout, calling T ′ →T simply a covering
in the given topology.
The absolute Picard functor PicX is never a separated presheaf in the Zariski
topology. Indeed, take an S-scheme T that carries an invertible sheaf N such that
f ∗
T N is nontrivial.
(For example, take T := P1
X and N := OT (1).
Then the
diagonal map X →X × X induces a section g of fT ; that is, gfT = 1T . Hence
f ∗
T N is nontrivial.) Now, there exists a Zariski covering T ′ →T such that the
pullback N|T ′ is trivial; here, T ′ is simply the disjoint union of the subsets in a
suitable ordinary open covering of T . So the pullback f ∗
T ′N|XT ′ is trivial too. Thus
PicX(T ) has a nonzero element whose restriction is zero in PicX(T ′).
According to descent theory, every representable functor is a sheaf in the Zariski
topology— in fact, in the ´etale and fppf topologies as well. Therefore, the abso-
lute Picard functor PicX is never representable. So, in the hope of obtaining a


PDF PAGE 17
THE PICARD SCHEME
17
representable functor that diﬀers as little as possible from PicX, we now deﬁne a
sequence of three successively more promising relative functors.
Definition 2.2. The relative Picard functor PicX/S is deﬁned by
PicX/S(T ) := Pic(XT )

Pic(T ).
Denote its associated sheaves in the Zariski, ´etale, and fppf topologies by
Pic(X/S) (zar), Pic(X/S) (´et), Pic(X/S) (fppf) .
We now have a sequence of ﬁve Picard functors, and each one maps naturally
into the next. So each one maps naturally into any of its successors. If the latter
functor is one of the three just displayed, then it is a sheaf in the indicated topology;
in fact, it is the sheaf associated to any one of its predecessors, and the map between
them is the natural map from a presheaf to its associated sheaf, as is easy to check.
In particular, the three displayed sheaves are the sheaves associated to the absolute
Picard functor PicX, as well as to the relative Picard functor PicX/S.
Since PicX/S is not a priori a sheaf, it is remarkable that it is representable so
often in practice.
Note that, for every S-scheme T , each T -point of Pic(X/S) (fppf), or element of
Pic(X/S) (fpqc)(T ), is represented by an invertible sheaf L′ on XT ′ for some fppf-
covering T ′ →T . Moreover, there must be an fppf-covering T ′′ →T ′ ×T T ′ such
that the two pullbacks of L′ to XT ′′ are isomorphic— or to put it informally, the
restrictions of L′ must agree on a covering of the overlaps.
Furthermore, a second such sheaf L1 on XT1 represents the same T -point if
and only if there is an fppf-covering T ′
1 →T1 ×T T ′ such that the pullbacks of L′
and L1 to XT ′
1 are isomorphic. Technically, this condition includes the preceding
one, which concerns the case where T1 = T ′ and L1 = L′ since L′ must represent
the same T -point as itself. Of course, similar considerations apply to the Picard
functors for the Zariski and ´etale topologies as well.
Exercise 2.3. Given an S-scheme T of the form T = Spec(A) where A is a
local ring, show that the natural maps are isomorphisms
PicX(A)
∼
−→PicX/S(A)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (zar)(A)
where PicX(A) := PicX(T ), where PicX/S(A) := PicX/S(T ), and so forth.
Assume A is Artin local with algebraically closed residue ﬁeld. Show
PicX(A)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (´et)(A).
Assume A is an algebraically closed ﬁeld k. Show
PicX(k)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (fppf)(k).
Exercise 2.4. Show that the natural map
Pic(X/S) (zar) →Pic(X/S) (´et)
need not be an isomorphism. Speciﬁcally, take X to be the following curve in the
real projective plane:
X : u2 + v2 + w2 = 0 in P2
R.
Then X has no R-points, but over the complex numbers C, there is an isomorphism
ϕ: XC
∼
−→P1
C.
Show that ϕ∗O(1) deﬁnes an element of Pic(X/R) (´et)(R), which is not in the image


PDF PAGE 18
18
S. L. KLEIMAN
of Pic(X/R) (zar)(R).
The main result of this section is the following comparison theorem. It identiﬁes
two useful conditions: the ﬁrst guarantees that the ﬁrst three relative functors can
be viewed as subfunctors of the fourth; together, the two conditions guarantee
that all four functors coincide. The second condition has three successively weaker
forms. Before we can prove the theorem, we must develop some theory.
Theorem 2.5 (Comparison). Assume OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally; that is,
for any S-scheme T , the comorphism of fT is an isomorphism, OT
∼
−→fT∗OXT .
1. Then the natural maps are injections:
PicX/S ֒→Pic(X/S) (zar) ֒→Pic(X/S) (´et) ֒→Pic(X/S) (fppf) .
2. All three maps are isomorphisms if also f has a section; the latter two maps
are isomorphisms if also f has a section locally in the Zariski topology; and the last
map is isomorphism if also f has a section locally in the ´etale topology.
Exercise 2.6. Assume OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally. Using Theorem 2.5,
show that its four functors have the same geometric points; in other words, for
every algebraically closed ﬁeld k containing the residue class ﬁeld of a point of S,
the k-points of all four functors are, in a natural way, the same. Show, in fact, that
these k-points are just the elements of Pic(Xk).
What if OS
∼
−→f∗OX does not necessarily hold universally?
Lemma 2.7. Assume OS
∼
−→f∗OX.
Then the functor N 7→f ∗N is fully-
faithful from the category C of locally free sheaves of ﬁnite rank on S to that on X.
The essential image is formed by the sheaves M on X such that (i) the image f∗M
is in C and (ii) the natural map f ∗f∗M →M is an isomorphism.
Proof. (Compare with [EGA IV4, 21.13.2].) For any N in C, there is a string
of three natural isomorphisms
N
∼
−→N ⊗f∗OX
∼
−→N ⊗f∗f ∗OS
∼
−→f∗f ∗N.
(2.7.1)
The ﬁrst isomorphism arises by tensor product with the comorphism of f; this
comorphism is an isomorphism by hypothesis. The second isomorphism arises from
the identiﬁcation OX = f ∗OS. The third arises from the projection formula.
For any N ′ in C, also Hom(N, N ′) is in C. Hence, (2.7.1) yields an isomorphism
Hom(N, N ′)
∼
−→f∗f ∗Hom(N, N ′).
Now, since N and N ′ are locally free of ﬁnite rank, the natural map
f ∗Hom(N, N ′) →Hom(f ∗N, f ∗N ′)
is an isomorphism locally, so globally. Hence there is an isomorphism of groups
Hom(N, N ′)
∼
−→Hom(f ∗N, f ∗N ′).
In other words, N 7→f ∗N is fully-faithful.
Finally, the essential image consists of the sheaves M that are isomorphic to
those of the form f ∗N for some N in C. Given such an M and N, there is an
isomorphism f∗M ≃N owing to (2.7.1). Hence f∗M is in C, and f ∗f∗M →M
is an isomorphism locally, so globally; thus (i) and (ii) hold. Conversely, if (i) and
(ii) hold, then M is, by deﬁnition, in the essential image.
□


PDF PAGE 19
THE PICARD SCHEME
19
Proof of Part 1 of Theorem 2.5. Given λ ∈PicX/S(T ), represent λ by
an invertible sheaf L on XT .
Suppose λ maps to 0 in Pic(X/S) (fppf)(T ). Then
there exist an fppf covering p: T ′ →T and an isomorphism p∗
XL ≃f ∗
T ′N ′ for some
invertible sheaf N ′ on T ′. Hence Lemma 2.7 implies that fT ′∗p∗
XL ≃N ′. Now, p
is ﬂat, so p∗fT ∗L
∼
−→fT ′∗p∗
XL. So p∗fT ∗L ≃N ′. Hence fT ∗L is invertible and the
natural map f ∗
T fT ∗L →L is an isomorphism, as both statements hold after pullback
via p, which is faithfully ﬂat. Therefore, λ = 0. Thus PicX/S ֒→Pic(X/S) (fppf).
The rest is formal. Indeed, take the last injection, and form the associated
sheaves in the Zariski topology. This operation is exact by general (Grothendieck)
topology, and Pic(X/S) (fppf) remains the same, as it is already a Zariski sheaf. Thus
Pic(X/S) (zar) ֒→Pic(X/S) (fppf). Similarly, Pic(X/S) (´et) ֒→Pic(X/S) (fppf).
Alternatively, we can avoid the use of Lemma 2.7 by starting from the fact
that Pic(X/S) (fppf) is the sheaf associated to PicX, rather than to PicX/S. This
way, we may assume N ′ = OT ′. Then fT ′∗p∗
XL ≃N ′ because OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds
universally. We now proceed just as before.
□
Definition 2.8. Assume f has a section g, so fg = 1. Let T be an S-scheme,
and L a sheaf on XT . Then a g-rigidiﬁcation of L is the choice of an isomorphism
u: OT
∼
−→g∗
T L, assuming one exists.
Lemma 2.9. Assume f has a section g, and let T be an S-scheme. Form the
group of isomorphism classes of pairs (L, u) where L is an invertible sheaf on XT
and u is a g-rigidiﬁcation of L. Then this group is carried isomorphically onto
PicX/S(T ) by the homomorphism ρ deﬁned by ρ(L, u) := L.
Proof. Given λ in PicX/S(T ), represent λ by an invertible sheaf M on XT . Set
L := M⊗(f ∗
T g∗
TM)−1. Then L too represents λ. Also g∗
T L = g∗
T M⊗g∗
T f ∗
T g∗
T M−1.
Now, g∗
T f ∗
T = 1 as fg = 1. Hence the natural isomorphism g∗
T M⊗(g∗
TM)−1
∼
−→OT
induces a g-rigidiﬁcation of L. Thus ρ is surjective.
To prove ρ is injective, let (L, u) represent an element of its kernel.
Then
there exist an invertible sheaf N on T and an isomorphism v: L
∼
−→f ∗
T N. Set
w := g∗
T v ◦u, so w: OT
∼
−→g∗
T L
∼
−→N. Now, a map of pairs is just a map w′ of
the ﬁrst components such that g∗
T w′ is compatible with the two g-rigidiﬁcations. So
v: (L, u)
∼
−→(f ∗
T N, w) and f ∗
T w: (OXT , 1)
∼
−→(f ∗
T N, w). Thus ρ is injective.
□
Lemma 2.10. Assume f has a section g, and assume OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds uni-
versally. Let T be an S-scheme, L an invertible sheaf on XT , and u a g-rigidiﬁcation
of L. Then every automorphism of the pair (L, u) is trivial.
Proof. An automorphism of (L, u) is just an automorphism v: L
∼
−→L such
that g∗
T v ◦u: OT
∼
−→g∗
T L
∼
−→g∗
T L is equal to u. But then g∗
T v = 1. Now,
v ∈Hom(L, L) = H0(Hom(L, L)) = H0(OXT ) = H0(OT );
the middle equation holds since the natural map OXT →Hom(L, L) is locally an
isomorphism, so globally one, and the last equation holds since OT
∼
−→f∗OXT . But
g∗
T v = 1. Therefore, v = 1.
□
Proof of Part 2 of Theorem 2.5. Suppose f has a section g. Owing to
Part 1, it suﬃces to prove that every λ ∈Pic(X/S) (fppf)(T ) lies in PicX/S(T ).
Represent λ by a λ′ ∈PicX/S(T ′) where T ′ →T is an fppf covering. Then there
is an fppf covering T ′′ →T ′ ×T T ′ such that the two pullbacks of λ′ to XT ′′ are
equal. We may assume T ′′
∼
−→T ′ ×T T ′ because PicX/S is separated for the fppf


PDF PAGE 20
20
S. L. KLEIMAN
topology, again owing to Part 1.
Owing to Lemma 2.9, we may represent λ′ by a pair (L′, u′) where L′ is an
invertible sheaf on XT ′ and u′ is a g-rigidiﬁcation of L′. Furthermore, on XT ′×T ′,
there is an isomorphism v′ from the pullback of (L′, u′) via the ﬁrst projection onto
the pullback via the second.
Consider the three projections XT ′×T ′×T ′ →XT ′×T ′. Let v′
ij denote the pull-
back of v′ via the projection to the ith and jth factors. Then v′−1
13 v′
23v′
12 is an
automorphism of the pullback of (L′, u′) via the ﬁrst projection XT ′×T ′×T ′ →XT ′.
So, owing to Lemma 2.10, this automorphism is trivial. Hence (L′, u′) descends to
a pair (L, u) on XT . Therefore, λ lies in PicX/S(T ).
The rest is formal. Indeed, suppose that there is a Zariski covering T ′ →T such
that fT ′ has a section. Then, by the above, Pic(X/S) (zar) |T ′
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (fppf) |T ′.
Hence, by general (Grothendieck) topology, Pic(X/S) (zar)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (fppf) since
both source and target are sheaves in the Zariski topology and a map of sheaves is
an isomorphism if it is so locally. Similarly, Pic(X/S) (´et)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (fppf) if f has
a section locally in the ´etale topology.
□
Remark 2.11. There is another way to prove Theorem 2.5. This way is more
sophisticated, and yields more information, which we won’t need. Here is the idea.
Recall [Ha83, Ex. III, 4.5, p. 224] that, for any ringed space R, there is a
natural isomorphism
Pic(R) = H1(R, O∗
R).
(2.11.1)
Now, given any S-scheme T , form the presheaf T ′ 7→H1(XT ′, O∗
XT ′ ) on T . Its
associated sheaf is [Ha83, Prp. III, 8.1, p. 250] simply R1fT ∗O∗
XT . Therefore,
Pic(X/S) (zar)(T ) = H0(T, R1fT ∗O∗
XT ).
(2.11.2)
Consider the Leray spectral sequence [Gd58, Thm. II, 4.17.1, p. 201]
Epq
2 := Hp(T, RqfT ∗O∗
XT ) =⇒Hp+q(XT , O∗
XT ),
and form its exact sequence of terms of low degree [Gd58, Thm. I, 4.5.1, p. 82]
0 →H1(T, fT∗O∗
XT ) →H1(XT , O∗
XT ) →H0(T, R1fT ∗O∗
XT )
→H2(T, fT∗O∗
XT ) →H2(XT , O∗
XT ).
(2.11.3)
If OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally, then H1(T, O∗
T )
∼
−→H1(T, fT ∗O∗
XT ). Hence
the beginning of (2.11.3) becomes
0 →Pic(T ) →Pic(XT ) →Pic(X/S) (zar)(T ).
Thus PicX/S ֒→Pic(X/S) (zar).
If also f has a section g, then g induces, for each p, a left inverse of the map
Hp(T, fT ∗O∗
XT ) →Hp(XT , O∗
XT ) induced by f. So the latter is injective. Hence,
H1(XT , O∗
XT ) →H0(T, R1fT∗O∗
XT ) is surjective. Thus PicX/S
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (zar).
The preceding argument works for the ´etale and fppf topologies too with little
change. First of all, consider the functor
Gm(T ) := H0(T, O∗
T ).
Let u be an indeterminate. Then Gm(T ) is representable by the S-scheme
Gm := Spec(OS[u, u−1]).


PDF PAGE 21
THE PICARD SCHEME
21
Indeed, giving an S-map T →Gm is the same as giving an H0(S, OS)-homomor-
phism from H0(S, OS)[u, u−1] to H0(T, OT ), and giving such a homomorphism is
the same as assigning to u a unit in H0(T, OT ). Now, since Gm(T ) is representable,
it is a sheaf for the ´etale and fppf topologies.
Grothendieck’s generalization [FGA, p. 190-16] of Hilbert’s Theorem 90 asserts
the formula
Pic(T ) = H1(T, Gm)
where the H1 can be computed in either the ´etale or fppf topology. The proof is
simple, and similar to the proof of (2.11.1). The H1 can be computed as a ˇCech
group. And, essentially by deﬁnition, for a covering T ′ →T , a ˇCech cocycle with
values in Gm amounts to descent data on OT ′. The data is eﬀective by descent
theory, and the resulting sheaf on T is invertible since the covering is faithfully ﬂat.
In the present context, the exact sequence (2.11.3) becomes
0 →H1(T, fT∗Gm) →H1(XT , Gm) →H0(T, R1fT ∗Gm)
→H2(T, fT∗Gm) →H2(XT , Gm).
(2.11.4)
Furthermore, the proof of (2.11.2) yields, for example in the fppf topology,
Pic(X/S) (fppf)(T ) = H0(T, R1fT ∗Gm).
If OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally, then it follows from the deﬁnitions that
fT∗Gm = Gm. Hence the beginning of (2.11.4) becomes
0 →Pic(T ) →Pic(XT ) →Pic(X/S) (fppf)(T ).
Thus PicX/S ֒→Pic(X/S) (fppf).
And PicX/S
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (fppf) if also f has a
section. As before, the rest of Theorem 2.5 follows formally.
The ´etale group H2(T, Gm) was studied extensively by Grothendieck [Dix,
pp. 46–188]. He showed that it gives one of two signiﬁcant generalizations of the
Brauer group of central simple algebras over a ﬁeld. The other is the group of
Azumaya algebras on T . He denoted the latter by Br(T ) and the former by Br′(T ).
Hence [Dix, pp. 127–128], if OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally, then (2.11.4) becomes
0 →Pic(T ) →Pic(XT ) →Pic(X/S) (´et)(T ) →Br′(T ) →Br′(XT );
in particular, the obstruction to representing an element of Pic(X/S) (´et)(T ) by an
invertible sheaf on XT is given by an element of Br′(T ), which maps to 0 in Br′(XT ).
Using the smoothness of Gm as an S-scheme, Grothendieck [Dix, p. 180] proved
the natural homomorphisms are isomorphisms from the ´etale groups Hp(T, Gm) to
the corresponding fppf groups. Hence, if OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally, then it
follows from (2.11.4) via the Five Lemma that, whether f has a section locally in
the ´etale topology or not,
Pic(X/S) (´et)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (fppf) .
Nevertheless, when a discussion is set in the greatest possible generality, it is
common to work with Pic(X/S) (fppf) and call it the Picard functor.


PDF PAGE 22
22
S. L. KLEIMAN
3. Relative eﬀective divisors
Grothendieck constructed the Picard scheme by taking a suitable family of
eﬀective divisors and forming the quotient modulo linear equivalence. This section
develops the basic theory of these notions.
3.1 (Eﬀective divisors). A closed subscheme D ⊂X is called an eﬀective
(Cartier) divisor if its ideal I is invertible. Given an OX-module F and n ∈Z, set
F(nD) := F ⊗I⊗−n.
In particular, OX(−D) = I.
So the inclusion I ֒→OX yields, via tensor
product with OX(D), an injection OX ֒→OX(D), which, in turn, corresponds to a
global section of OX(D). This section is not arbitrary since it corresponds to an
injection. Sections corresponding to injections are termed regular.
Conversely, given an arbitrary invertible sheaf L on X, let H0(X, L)reg denote
the subset of H0(X, L) consisting of the regular sections, those corresponding to
injections L−1 ֒→OX. And let |L| denote the set of eﬀective divisors D such that
OX(D) is, in some way, isomorphic to L. For historical reasons, |L| is called the
complete linear system associated to L (but |L| needn’t be a Pn if X isn’t integral).
Exercise 3.2. Under the conditions of (3.1), establish a canonical isomorphism
H0(X, L)reg

H0(X, O∗
X)
∼
−→|L|.
Definition 3.3. A relative eﬀective divisor on X/S is an eﬀective divisor
D ⊂X that is S-ﬂat.
Lemma 3.4. Let D ⊂X be a closed subscheme, x ∈D a point, and s ∈S its
image. Then the following statements are equivalent:
(i) The subscheme D ⊂X is a relative eﬀective divisor at x (that is, in a
neighborhood of x).
(ii) The schemes X and D are S-ﬂat at x, and the ﬁber Ds is an eﬀective divisor
on Xs at x.
(iii) The scheme X is S-ﬂat at x, and the subscheme D ⊂X is cut out at x by
one element that is regular (a nonzerodivisor) on the ﬁber Xs.
Proof. For convenience, set A := OS,s and denote its residue ﬁeld by k. In
addition, set B := OX,x and C := OD,x. Then B ⊗A k = OXs,x.
Assume (i), and let’s prove (ii). By hypothesis, D is an eﬀective divisor at x.
So there is a regular element b ∈B that generates the ideal of D. Multiplication
by b deﬁnes a short exact sequence
0 →B →B →C →0.
In turn, this sequence induces the following exact sequence:
TorA
1 (B, k) →TorA
1 (B, k) →TorA
1 (C, k) →B ⊗k →B ⊗k.
By hypothesis, D is S-ﬂat at x; hence, TorA
1 (C, k) = 0. So B ⊗k →B ⊗k is
injective. Its image is the ideal of Ds. Thus Ds is an eﬀective divisor.
Since TorA
1 (C, k) = 0, the map TorA
1 (B, k) →TorA
1 (B, k) is surjective. This
map is given by multiplication by b, and b lies in the maximal ideal of B. Also,
TorA
1 (B, k) is a ﬁnitely generated B-module. Hence, TorA
1 (B, k) = 0 by Nakayama’s
lemma. Therefore, by the local criterion of ﬂatness [SGA 1, Thm. 5.6, p. 98] or
[OB72, Thm. 6.1, p. 73], B is A-ﬂat; in other words, X is S-ﬂat at x. Thus (ii)


PDF PAGE 23
THE PICARD SCHEME
23
holds.
Assume (ii). To prove (iii), denote the ideal of D in B by I, and that of Ds in
B ⊗k by I′. Take an element b ∈I whose image b′ in B ⊗k generates I′; such a
b exists because Ds is an eﬀective divisor at x by hypothesis. For the same reason,
b′ is regular. It remains to prove b generates I.
Consider the short exact sequence
0 →I →B →C →0.
By hypothesis, C is A-ﬂat. Hence the map I ⊗k →B ⊗k is injective. Its image
is I′, which is generated by b′. So the image of b in I ⊗k generates it. Hence, by
Nakayama’s lemma, b generates I. Thus (iii) holds.
Assume (iii). To prove (i), again denote the ideal of D in B by I. By hypothesis,
I is generated by an element b whose image b′ in B ⊗k is regular. We have to prove
b is regular and C is A-ﬂat.
The exact sequence 0 →I →B →C →0 yields this one:
TorA
1 (B, k) →TorA
1 (C, k) →I ⊗k →B ⊗k.
(3.4.1)
The last map is injective for the following reason. Since I = Bb, multiplication
by b induces a surjection B →I, so a surjection B ⊗k →I ⊗k. Consider the
composition
B ⊗k →I ⊗k →B ⊗k.
It is given by multiplication by b′, so is injective because b′ is regular.
Hence
B ⊗k
∼
−→I ⊗k. Therefore, I ⊗k →B ⊗k is injective.
By hypothesis, B is A-ﬂat. So TorA
1 (B, k) = 0. Hence the exactness of (3.4.1)
implies TorA
1 (C, k) = 0. Therefore, by the local criterion, C is A-ﬂat.
Since B and C are A-ﬂat and 0 →I →B →C →0 is exact, also I is A-ﬂat.
Deﬁne K by the exact sequence 0 →K →B →I →0. Then the sequence
0 →K ⊗k →B ⊗k →I ⊗k →0
is exact since I is A-ﬂat. But B ⊗k
∼
−→I ⊗k. Hence K ⊗k = 0. Therefore, K = 0
by Nakayama’s lemma. But K is the kernel of multiplication by b on B. So b is
regular. Thus (i) holds.
□
Exercise 3.5. Let D and E be relative eﬀective divisors on X/S, and D + E
their sum. Show D + E is a relative eﬀective divisor too.
Definition 3.6. Deﬁne a functor DivX/S by the formula
DivX/S(T ) := { relative eﬀective divisors D on XT /T }.
Note DivX/S is indeed a functor. Namely, given a relative eﬀective divisor D
on XT /T and an arbitrary S-map p: T ′ →T , we have to see the T ′-ﬂat closed
subscheme DT ′ ⊂XT ′ is an eﬀective divisor. So let I denote the ideal of D. Since
D is T -ﬂat, p∗
XT I is equal to the ideal of DT ′. But, since I is invertible, so is p∗
XT I.
Thus DT ′ is a (relative) eﬀective divisor.
Theorem 3.7. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat.
Then DivX/S is repre-
sentable by an open subscheme DivX/S of the Hilbert scheme HilbX/S.


PDF PAGE 24
24
S. L. KLEIMAN
Proof. Set H := HilbX/S, and let W ⊂X × H be the universal (closed)
subscheme, and q: W →H the projection. Let V denote the set of points w ∈W
at which W is an eﬀective divisor. Plainly V is open in W. Set Z := q(W −V ).
Then Z is closed because q is proper. Set U := H −Z. Then U is open, and q−1U
is an eﬀective divisor in X × U. In fact, since q is ﬂat, q−1U is a relative eﬀective
divisor in X × U/U.
It remains to show that U represents DivX/S. So let T be an S-scheme, and
D ⊂XT /T a relative eﬀective divisor. By the universal property of the pair (H, W),
there exists a unique map g: T →H such that g−1
X W = D. We have to show that
g factors through U.
For each t ∈T , the ﬁber Dt is an eﬀective divisor since it is obtained by base
change (or owing to Lemma 3.4). But Dt = Wg(t) ⊗kt where kt is the residue ﬁeld
of t. So Wg(t) too is a divisor, as a ﬁeld extension is faithfully ﬂat. Hence, since
X ×H and W are H-ﬂat, W is, by Lemma 3.4, a relative eﬀective divisor along the
ﬁber over g(t). Therefore, g(t) ∈U. So, since U is open, g factors through U.
□
Exercise 3.8. Assume f : X →S is ﬂat and is projective Zariski locally over
S. Assume its ﬁbers are curves, that is, of pure dimension 1. Given m ≥1, let
Divm
X/S be the functor whose T -points are the relative eﬀective divisors D on XT /T
with ﬁbers Dt of degree m.
Show the Divm
X/S are representable by open and closed subschemes of ﬁnite
type Divm
X/S ⊂DivX/S, which are disjoint and cover.
Let X0 ⊂X be the subscheme where X/S is smooth. Show X0 = Div1
X/S.
Let Xm
0 be the m-fold S-ﬁbered product. Show there is a natural S-map
α: Xm
0 →Divm
X/S,
which is given on T -points by α(Γ1, . . . , Γm) = P Γi.
Remark 3.9. Consider the map α of Exercise 3.8. Plainly α is compatible
with permuting the factors of Xm
0 . Hence α factors through the symmetric product
X(m)
0
. In fact, α induces an isomorphism
X(m)
0
∼
−→Divm
X0/S .
This isomorphism is treated in detail in [De73, Prp. 6.3.9, p. 437] and in outline
in [BLR, Prp. 3, p. 254].
3.10 (The module Q). Assume f : X →S is proper, and let F be a coherent
OX-module ﬂat over S. Recall from [EGA III2, 7.7.6] that there exist a coherent
OS-module Q and an isomorphism of functors in the quasi-coherent OS-module N:
q: Hom(Q, N)
∼
−→f∗(F ⊗f ∗N).
(3.10.1)
The pair (Q, q) is unique, up to unique isomorphism, and by [EGA III2, 7.7.9],
forming it commutes with changing the base, in particular, with localizing.
Fix s ∈S and assume S = Spec(OS,s). Note that the following conditions are
equivalent:
(i) the OS-module Q is free (or equivalently, projective);
(ii) the functor N 7→f∗(F ⊗f ∗N) is right exact;
(iii) for all N, the natural map is an isomorphism, f∗(F) ⊗N
∼
−→f∗(F ⊗f ∗N);
(iv) the natural map is a surjection, H0(X, F) ⊗ks ։ H0(Xs, Fs).


PDF PAGE 25
THE PICARD SCHEME
25
Indeed, the equivalence of (i)–(iii) is elementary and straightforward. Moreover,
(iv) is a special case of (iii). Conversely, (iv) implies (iii) by [EGA III2, 7.7.10]
or [OB72, Cor. 5.1 p. 72]; this useful implication is known as the “property of
exchange.”
In addition, (i)–(iv) are implied by the following condition:
(v) the ﬁrst cohomology group of the ﬁber vanishes, H1(Xs, Fs) = 0.
Indeed, (v) implies that R1f∗(F ⊗f ∗N) = 0 for all N by [EGA III2, 7.5.3] or
[OB72, Cor. 2.1 p. 68]; in turn, this vanishing implies (ii) owing to the long exact
sequence of higher direct images.
Exercise 3.11. Assume f : X →S is proper and ﬂat, and its geometric ﬁbers
are reduced and connected. Show OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally.
Definition 3.12. Let L be an invertible sheaf on X.
Deﬁne a subfunctor
LinSysL/X/S of DivX/S by the formula
LinSysL/X/S(T ) := { relative eﬀective divisors D on XT /T such that
OXT (D) ≃LT ⊗f ∗
T N for some invertible sheaf N on T }.
Notice the similarity of this deﬁnition with that, Deﬁnition 2.2, of PicX/S:
both deﬁnitions work with isomorphism classes of invertible sheaves on XT modulo
Pic(T ), in the hope of producing a representable functor. Here, this hope is fulﬁlled
under suitable hypotheses on f, according to the next theorem.
Theorem 3.13. Assume X/S is proper and ﬂat, and its geometric ﬁbers are
integral. Let L be an invertible sheaf on X, and let Q be the OS-module associated
in Subsection 3.10 to F := L. Set L := P(Q). Then L represents LinSysL/X/S.
Proof. Let D ∈LinSysL/X/S(T ). Say OXT (D) ≃LT ⊗f ∗
T N. Then N is
determined up to isomorphism. Indeed, let N ′ be a second choice. Then
LT ⊗f ∗
T N ≃LT ⊗f ∗
T N ′.
So f ∗
T N ≃f ∗
T N ′ since L is invertible. Hence N ≃N ′ by Lemma 2.7, which applies
to fT : XT →T since OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally by Exercise 3.11.
Say D is deﬁned by σ ∈H0(XT , LT ⊗f ∗
T N). Now, forming Q commutes with
changing the base to T , and so (3.10.1) becomes
Hom(QT , N)
∼
−→fT∗(LT ⊗f ∗
T N).
(3.13.1)
Hence σ corresponds to a map u: QT →N.
Let t ∈T . Since D is a relative eﬀective divisor on XT /T , its ﬁber Dt is a
divisor on Xt by Lemma 3.4. Since Dt is deﬁned by σt ∈H0(Xt, L|Xt), necessarily
σt ̸= 0. But σt corresponds to u⊗kt, so u⊗kt ̸= 0. Now, N is invertible, so N ⊗kt
is a kt-vector space of dimension 1. So u ⊗kt is surjective. Hence, by Nakayama’s
lemma, u is surjective at t. But t is arbitrary. So u is surjective everywhere.
Therefore, u: QT →N deﬁnes an S-map p: T →L by [EGA II, 4.2.3]. Since
(N, u) is determined up to isomorphism, a second choice yields the same p.
Plainly, this construction is functorial in T . Thus we obtain a map of functors,
Λ: LinSysL/X/S(T ) →L(T ).
Let us prove Λ is an isomorphism.
Let p ∈L(T ), so p: T →L is an S-map. Then p arises from a surjection


PDF PAGE 26
26
S. L. KLEIMAN
u: QT ։ N; namely, u = p∗α where α: QL ։ O(1) is the tautological map.
Moreover, there is only one such pair (N, u) up to isomorphism.
Via the isomorphism in (3.13.1), the surjection u corresponds to a global section
σ ∈H0(XT , LT ⊗f ∗
T N). Let t ∈T . Then u ⊗kt is surjective, so u ⊗kt ̸= 0. But
u ⊗kt corresponds to σt ∈H0(Xt, L|Xt), so σt ̸= 0. But Xt is integral since the
geometric ﬁbers of X/S are integral by hypothesis. Hence σt is regular.
The section σ deﬁnes a map (LT ⊗f ∗
T N)−1 →OXT . Its image is the ideal of
a closed subscheme D ⊂X, which is cut out locally by one element; moreover, on
the ﬁber Xt, this element corresponds to σt, so is regular. Hence D is a relative
eﬀective divisor on XT /T by Lemma 3.4. In fact, D ∈LinSysL/X/S(T ). Plainly, D
is the only such divisor corresponding to (N, u), so mapping to p under Λ.
Thus Λ is an isomorphism. In other words, L represents LinSysL/X/S.
□
Exercise 3.14. Under the conditions of Theorem 3.13, show that there exists
a natural relative eﬀective divisor W on XL

L such that
OXL(W) = LL ⊗f ∗
LOL(1).
Furthermore, W possesses the following universal property: given any S-scheme T
and any relative eﬀective divisor D on XT /T such that OXT (D) ≃LT ⊗f ∗
T N for
some invertible sheaf N on T , there exist a unique S-map w: T →L such that
(1 × w)−1W = D.
4. The Picard scheme
This section proves Grothendieck’s main theorem about the Picard scheme,
which asserts its existence if X/S is projective and ﬂat and its geometric ﬁbers
are integral; in fact, the functor Pic(X/S) (´et) is representable. The proof involves
Grothendieck’s method of using functors to prescribe patching. The basic theory
is developed in [EGA G, Ch. 0, Sct. 4.5, pp. 102–107], and is applied in [EGA G,
Ch. 1, Sct. 9, pp. 354–401] to the construction of Grassmannians and related pa-
rameter schemes. The present construction involves the basic theory, but is more
sophisticated and more complicated because it works not simply with the Zariski
topology, but also with the ´etale topology.
Definition 4.1. If any of the four relative Picard functors of Deﬁnition 2.2 is
representable, then the representing scheme is called the Picard scheme and denoted
by PicX/S. Moreover, we say simply that the Picard scheme PicX/S exists.
Notice that, although there are four relative Picard functors, there is at most
one Picard scheme. Of course, if any functor is representable, then the representing
scheme is uniquely determined, up to a unique isomorphism that preserves the
identiﬁcation of the given functor with the functor of points of the representing
scheme. But here, there is more to the story.
Indeed, for example, say Pic(X/S) (´et) is representable by PicX/S. Then, by
descent theory, Pic(X/S) (´et) is already a sheaf in the fppf topology; so it is equal to
its associated sheaf Pic(X/S) (fppf). Hence, it too is representable by PicX/S. On
the other hand, PicX/S may or may not be representable; however, if it is, then it,
as well, must be representable by PicX/S.
Exercise 4.2. Assume PicX/S exists, and OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally.
Let T be an S-scheme, and L an invertible sheaf on XT . Show that there exist


PDF PAGE 27
THE PICARD SCHEME
27
a subscheme N ⊂T and an invertible sheaf N on N with these three properties:
ﬁrst, LN ≃f ∗
NN; second, given any S-map t: T ′ →T such that LT ′ ≃f ∗
T ′N ′ for
some invertible sheaf N ′ on T ′, necessarily t factors through N and N ′ ≃t∗N; and
third, N is a closed subscheme if PicX/S is separated. Show also that the ﬁrst two
properties determine N uniquely and N up to isomorphism.
Exercise 4.3. Assume PicX/S exists. An invertible sheaf P on X × PicX/S
is called a universal sheaf, or Poincar´e sheaf, if P possesses the following property:
given any S-scheme T and any invertible sheaf L on XT , there exists a unique
S-map h: T →PicX/S such that, for some invertible sheaf N on T ,
L ≃(1 × h)∗P ⊗f ∗
T N.
Show that a universal sheaf P exists if and only if PicX/S represents PicX/S.
Assume OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally. Show that, if P exists, then it is unique
up to tensor product with the pullback of a unique invertible sheaf on PicX/S.
Show that, if also f has a section, then a universal sheaf P exists.
Find an example where no universal sheaf P exists.
Exercise 4.4. Assume PicX/S exists, and let S′ be an S-scheme. Show that
PicXS′/S′ exists too, and in fact, that
PicXS′/S′ = PicX/S ×SS′.
Thus forming the Picard scheme commutes with changing the base.
Find an example where PicXS′/S′ represents PicXS′/S′, but PicX/S does not
represent PicX/S.
Exercise 4.5. Assume PicX/S exists, and either it represents Pic(X/S) (fppf)
or OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally. Show the scheme points of PicX/S correspond,
in a natural bijective fashion, to the classes of invertible sheaves L on the ﬁbers of
X/S. A class is, by deﬁnition, represented by an L on an Xk where k is a ﬁeld
containing the residue ﬁeld ks of a (scheme) point s ∈S; an L′ on an Xk′ represents
the same class if and only if there is a third ﬁeld k′′ containing the other two such
that L|Xk′′ ≃L′|Xk′′.
Definition 4.6. The Abel map is the natural map of functors
AX/S(T ): DivX/S(T ) →PicX/S(T )
deﬁned by sending a relative eﬀective divisor D on XT /T to the sheaf OXT (D).
The target PicX/S may be replaced by any of its associated sheaves. If PicX/S
exists, then the term Abel map may refer to the corresponding map of schemes
AX/S : DivX/S →PicX/S .
Exercise 4.7. Assume X/S is proper and ﬂat with integral geometric ﬁbers.
Assume PicX/S exists, and denote it by P. View DivX/S as a P-scheme via the
Abel map. Assume a universal sheaf P exists, and let Q be the sheaf on P associated
to P as in Subsection 3.10. Show P(Q) = DivX/S as P-schemes.
Theorem 4.8 (Main). Assume f : X →S is projective Zariski locally over S,
and is ﬂat with integral geometric ﬁbers.
(1) Then PicX/S exists, is separated and locally of ﬁnite type over S, and
represents Pic(X/S) (´et).
(2) If also S is Noetherian and X/S is projective, then PicX/S is a disjoint


PDF PAGE 28
28
S. L. KLEIMAN
union of open subschemes, each an increasing union of open quasi-projective S-
schemes.
Proof. By [EGA G, (0, 4.5.5), p. 106], it is a local matter on S to represent
a Zariski sheaf on the category of S-schemes. Moreover, it is also a local matter on
S to prove that an S-scheme is separated and locally of ﬁnite type. Hence, in order
to prove (1), we may assume S is Noetherian and X/S is projective.
Plainly an S-scheme is separated if it is a disjoint union of separated open
subschemes, or if it is an increasing union of separated open subschemes. Hence
(1) follows from (2).
To prove (2), owing to Yoneda’s lemma, we may view the category of schemes
as a full subcategory of the category of functors by identifying a scheme T with its
functor of points. Denote this functor too by T in order to lighten the notation.
And say that the functor is a scheme, as well as that it is representable. Also, set
P := Pic(X/S) (´et) .
Note P(T ) = Hom(T, P).
Given a polynomial φ ∈Q[n], let P φ ⊂P be the ´etale subsheaf associated to
the presheaf whose T -points are represented by the invertible sheaves L on XT such
that we have
χ(Xt, L−1
t (n)) = φ(n) for all t ∈T.
(4.8.1)
Notice that this presheaf is well deﬁned, because (4.8.1) remains valid after any
base change p: T ′ →T ; indeed, for any t′ ∈T ′, for any i, and for any n, we have
Hi Xt′, L−1
t′ (n)

= Hi Xp(t′), L−1
p(t′)(n)

⊗kt kt′
because cohomology commutes with ﬂat base change by [Ha83, Prp. III, 9.3,
p. 255]. Hence P φ is well deﬁned too.
Fix a map T →P, and represent it by means of an ´etale covering p: T ′ →T
and an invertible sheaf L′ on XT ′. Consider the subset T ′φ ⊂T ′ deﬁned as follows:
T ′φ := { t′ ∈T ′ | χ
 Xt′, L−1
t′ (n)

= φ(n) }.
Then T ′φ is open by [EGA III2, 7.9.11].
Set T φ := p(T ′φ). Then T φ ⊂T is open as T ′φ ⊂T ′ is open and p is ´etale.
Moreover, T ′φ = p−1(T φ). Indeed, let t′ ∈p−1(T φ). Say p(t′) = p(t′
1) where
t′
1 ∈T ′φ. Now, there is an ´etale covering T ′′ →T ′×T T ′ such that the two pullbacks
of L′ to XT ′′ are isomorphic. Let t′′ ∈T ′′ have image t′ ∈T ′ under the ﬁrst map
T ′′ →T ′ and have the image t′
1 ∈T ′ under the second map. Then
χ
 Xt′, L−1
t′ (n)

= χ
 Xt′′, L−1
t′′ (n)

= χ
 Xt′
1, L−1
t′
1 (n)

= φ(n).
Hence t′ ∈T ′φ. Thus T ′φ ⊃p−1(T φ). Therefore, T ′φ = p−1(T φ).
Furthermore, T φ is (represents) the ﬁber product of functors P φ ×P T . Indeed,
to see they have the same R-points, let r: R →T be a map; form R′ := R ×T T ′
and r′ : R′ →T ′. Suppose r factors through T φ. Then r′ factors through T ′φ. So
R′ →T ′ →P factors through P φ essentially by deﬁnition. Now, R′ →R is an
´etale covering. Hence R →T →P factors through P φ since P φ is an ´etale sheaf.
Conversely, suppose R →T →P factors through P φ. Then R →P is deﬁned
by means of an ´etale covering R′′ →R and an invertible sheaf L′′ on XR′′ such
that χ(Xu, L′′−1
u (n)) = φ(n) for all u ∈R′′. Since both L′′ and L′ deﬁne R →P,
there is an ´etale covering R′′′ →R′′ ×R R′ such that the pullbacks of L′′ and L′ to


PDF PAGE 29
THE PICARD SCHEME
29
XR′′′ are isomorphic. Hence the image of r′ : R′ →T ′ lies in T ′φ. But the latter is
open. Hence r′ factors through it. Therefore, r: R →T factors through T φ. Thus
T φ and P φ ×P T have the same R-points.
Let φ vary. Plainly the T ′φ are disjoint and cover T ′. So the T φ are disjoint
and cover T . Hence, by a general result [EGA G, (0, 4.5.4), p. 103], if the P φ
are (representable by) schemes, then P is their disjoint union. Thus it remains to
represent each P φ by an increasing union of open quasi-projective S-schemes.
Fix φ. Given m ∈Z, let P φ
m ⊂P φ be the ´etale subsheaf associated to the
presheaf whose T -points are represented by the L on XT such that, in addition to
(4.8.1), we have
RifT ∗L(n) = 0 for all i ≥1 and n ≥m.
(4.8.2)
Notice that this presheaf is well deﬁned, because (4.8.2) remains valid after any
base change p: T ′ →T , as is shown next.
First, let’s see that (4.8.2) is equivalent to the following condition:
Hi(Xt, Lt(n)) = 0 for all i ≥1, all n ≥m, and all t ∈T.
(4.8.3)
Indeed, (4.8.3) implies (4.8.2); in fact, for any given i, t and n, if Hi(Xt, Lt(n)) = 0,
then RifT∗
 L(n) ⊗f ∗
T N

t = 0 for all quasi-coherent N on T by [EGA III2, 7.5.3]
or [OB72, Cor. 2.1 p. 68].
Conversely, assume (4.8.2). Fix t and n. Let’s proceed by descending induction
on i to prove Hi(Xt, Lt(n)) vanishes. It vanishes for i ≫1 by Serre’s Theorem
[EGA III1, 2.2.2]. Suppose it vanishes for some i ≥2. Then RifT ∗
 L(n) ⊗f ∗
T N

t
vanishes for all quasi-coherent N on T , as just noted. So Ri−1fT∗
 L(n) ⊗f ∗
TN

t is
right exact in N owing to the long exact sequence of higher direct images. Therefore,
by general principles, there is a natural isomorphism of functors
Ri−1fT∗(L(n))t ⊗Nt
∼
−→Ri−1fT ∗
 L(n) ⊗f ∗
T N

t.
Since (4.8.2) holds, both source and target vanish.
Taking N := kt yields the
vanishing of Hi−1(Xt, Lt(n)). Thus (4.8.2) implies (4.8.3).
Finally, for any t′ ∈T ′, any i, and any n, we have
Hi Xt′, Lt′(n)

= Hi Xp(t′), Lp(t′)(n)

⊗kt kt′
because cohomology commutes with ﬂat base change. So (4.8.3) remains valid after
the base change p: T ′ →T ; whence, (4.8.2) does too. Thus the presheaf is well
deﬁned, and so P φ
m is too.
Arguing much as we did for P φ ×P T , we ﬁnd, given a map T →P φ, that, as
m varies, the products P φ
m ×P φ T form a nested sequence of open subschemes of T ,
whose union is T . In the argument, the key change is in proving openness. In place
of [EGA III2, 7.9.11], we use the following part of Serre’s Theorem [EGA III1,
2.2.2]: given a coherent sheaf F on a projective scheme over a Noetherian ring A,
there are only ﬁnitely many i ≥1 and n ≥m such that Hi(F(n)) is nonzero, and
all these nonzero A-modules are ﬁnitely generated. Hence, if there is a prime p of
A such that Hi(F(n))p = 0 for all i ≥1 and n ≥m, then there is an a /∈p such
that Hi(F(n))a = 0 for all i ≥1 and n ≥m.
Therefore, again by [EGA G, (0, 4.5.4), p. 103], it suﬃces to represent each
P φ
m by a quasi-projective S-scheme.
Fix φ and m. Set φ0(n) := φ(m+n). Then there is an isomorphism of functors
P φ
m
∼
−→P φ0
0 , which is deﬁned as follows. First, deﬁne an endomorphism ε of PicX/S


PDF PAGE 30
30
S. L. KLEIMAN
by sending an invertible sheaf L on an XT to L(m). Plainly ε is an automorphism.
So ε induces an automorphism ε+ of the associated sheaf P. Plainly ε+ carries P φ
m
onto P φ0
0 . Thus it suﬃces to represent P φ0
0
by a quasi-projective S-scheme.
The function s 7→χ(Xs, OXs(n)) is locally constant on S by [EGA III2, 7.9.11].
Hence we may assume it is constant by replacing S by an open and closed subset.
Set ψ(n) := χ(Xs, OXs(n)).
Consider the Abel map AX/S : DivX/S →P. Note that DivX/S is a scheme, in
fact, an open subscheme of the Hilbert scheme HilbX/S, by Theorem 3.7. Form the
product P φ0
0
×P DivX/S. It is a scheme Z, in fact, an open subscheme of DivX/S,
by what was proved above. Set θ(n) := ψ(n)−φ0(n). Plainly Z lies in Hilbθ
X/S(n),
which is projective over S. Hence Z is quasi-projective.
Let’s now prove the projection α: Z →P φ0
0
is a surjection of ´etale sheaves. In
other words, given a T and a λ ∈P φ0
0 (T ), we have to ﬁnd an ´etale covering T1 →T
and a λ1 ∈Z(T1) such that α(λ1) ∈P φ0
0 (T1) is equal to the image of λ.
Represent λ by means of an ´etale covering p: T ′ →T and an invertible sheaf L′
on XT ′. Virtually by deﬁnition, the product T ′ ×P φ0
0
Z is equal to LinSysL′/XT ′/T ′.
So, by Theorem 3.13, this product is equal to P(Q) where Q is the OT ′-module
associated to L′ as in Subsection 3.10. Now, m = 0, so H1(Xt, Lt) = 0 for all t ∈T ′
owing to (4.8.3). Since (v) implies (i) in Subsection 3.10, therefore Q is locally free.
Hence P(Q) is smooth over T ′.
So there exist an ´etale covering T1 →T ′
and a T ′-map T1 →P(Q) by [EGA IV4, 17.16.3 (ii)].
Then the composition
T1 →P(Q) →Z →P φ0
0
is equal to the composition T1 →T ′ →T →P φ0
0 . In
other words, the map T1 →Z is a λ1 ∈Z(T1) such that α(λ1) ∈P φ0
0 (T1) is equal
to the image of λ. Since the composition T1 →T ′ →T is an ´etale covering, α is
thus a surjection of ´etale sheaves.
Plainly, the map α: Z →P φ0
0
is deﬁned by the invertible sheaf associated to the
universal relative eﬀective divisor on XZ/Z. So taking T := Z and T ′ := T above,
we conclude that the product Z ×P φ0
0
Z is a scheme and that the ﬁrst projection
is smooth and projective. Therefore, the theorem now results from the following
general lemma.
□
Lemma 4.9. Let α: Z →P be a map of ´etale sheaves, and set R := Z ×P Z.
Assume α is a surjection, Z is representable by a quasi-projective S-scheme, R is
representable by an S-scheme, and the ﬁrst projection R →Z is representable by a
smooth and proper map. Then P is representable by a quasi-projective S-scheme,
and α is representable by a smooth map.
Proof. To lighten the notation, let Z and R denote the corresponding schemes
as well. Since the structure map Z →S is quasi-projective, it is separated; whence,
the ﬁrst projection Z ×S Z →Z is too. But the ﬁrst projection R →Z is proper,
and factors naturally through a map h: R →Z ×S Z. Hence h is proper. But h
is a monomorphism; that is, h is injective on T -points. Therefore, h is a closed
embedding by [EGA IV3, 8.11.5].
Plainly, for each S-scheme T , the subset R(T ) ⊂Z(T ) ×S(T ) Z(T ) is the graph
of an equivalence relation. Also, the map of schemes R →Z is ﬂat and proper,
and Z is a quasi-projective S-scheme. It follows that there exist a quasi-projective
S-scheme Q and a faithfully ﬂat and projective map Z →Q such that R = Z ×Q Z.
(In other words, a ﬂat and proper equivalence relation on a quasi-projective scheme
is eﬀective.) In fact, R deﬁnes a map from Z to the Hilbert scheme HilbZ/S, and


PDF PAGE 31
THE PICARD SCHEME
31
its graph lies in the universal scheme as a closed subscheme, which descends to
Q ⊂HilbZ/S; for more details, see [AK80, Thm. (2.9), p. 70].
Since Z →Q is ﬂat, it is smooth if (and only if) its ﬁbers are smooth. But
these ﬁbers are, up to extension of the ground ﬁeld, the same as those of R →Z.
And R →Z is smooth by hypothesis. Thus Z →Q is smooth.
It remains to see that Q represents P. First, observe that Z →Q is (represents)
a surjection of ´etale sheaves. Indeed, given an element of Q(T ), set A := Z ×Q T .
Then A →T is smooth. So there exist an ´etale covering T ′ →T and a T -map
T ′ →A by [EGA IV4, 17.16.3 (ii)]. Then T ′ →A →Z is an element of Z(T ′),
which maps to the element of Q(T ′) induced by the given element of Q(T ).
Since Z →Q is a surjection of ´etale sheaves, Q is, in the category of ´etale
sheaves, the coequalizer of the pair of maps R ⇉Z by Exercise 4.10 below, which
is an elementary exercise in general Grothendieck topology. By the same exercise,
P too is the coequalizer of this pair of maps. But, in any category, the coequalizer
is unique up to unique isomorphism. Thus Q represents P.
□
Exercise 4.10. Given a map of ´etale sheaves F →G, show it is a surjection
if and only if G is the coequalizer of the pair of maps F ×G F ⇉F.
Exercise 4.11. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat, its geometric ﬁbers are
integral, and S is Noetherian. Let Z ⊂PicX/S be a subscheme of ﬁnite type.
Show Z is quasi-projective.
Exercise 4.12. Assume f : X →S is projective Zariski locally over S, and is
ﬂat with integral geometric ﬁbers. First, show that, if a universal sheaf P exists,
then the Abel map AX/S : DivX/S →PicX/S is projective Zariski locally over S.
Second, show that, in general, AX/S : DivX/S →PicX/S is proper. Proceed
by reducing this case to the ﬁrst: just use f : X →S itself to change the base.
Exercise 4.13. Assume f : X →S is ﬂat and projective Zariski locally over S.
Assume its geometric ﬁbers Xk are integral curves of arithmetic genus dim H1(OXk)
at least 1. Let X0 ⊂X be the open subscheme where X/S is smooth. Show there
is a natural closed embedding A: X0 ֒→PicX/S.
Example 4.14. In Theorem 4.8, the geometric ﬁbers of f are assumed to be
integral.
This condition is needed not only for the proof to work, but also for
the statement to hold. The matter is clariﬁed by the following example, which is
attributed to Mumford and is described in [FGA, p. 236-1] and in [BLR, p. 210].
Let R[[t]] be the ring of formal power series, S its spectrum. Let X ⊂P2
S be the
subscheme with inhomogeneous equation x2 + y2 = t, and f : X →S the structure
map. The generic ﬁber Xσ is a nondegenerate conic. The special ﬁber X0 is a pair
of conjugate lines; X0 is irreducible and geometrically connected. So f is ﬂat by
the implication (iii)⇒(i) of Lemma 3.4 with D := X. And OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds
universally by Exercise 3.11. However, as we’ll see, PicX/S does not exist!
On the other hand, set S′ := C[[t]] and X′ := X × S′. Then fS′ has sections:
for example, one section g′ is deﬁned by setting
x :=
√
−1 and y :=
√
1 + t = 1 + (1/2)t −(1/8)t2 + · · · .
Hence all four relative Picard functors of X′/S′ are equal by the Comparison Theo-
rem, Theorem 2.5. Furthermore, as we’ll see, PicX′/S′ exists, but is not separated!


PDF PAGE 32
32
S. L. KLEIMAN
In fact, PicX′/S′ is a disjoint union of isomorphic open nonseparated sub-
schemes S′
n for n ∈Z. Each S′
n is obtained from S′ by repeating the origin inﬁnitely
often; more precisely, to form S′
n, take a copy S′
a,b of S′ for each pair a, b ∈Z with
a+b = n, and glue the S′
a,b together oﬀtheir closed points. Each S′
a,b parameterizes
a diﬀerent degeneration of the invertible sheaf of degree n on the generic ﬁber X′
σ;
the degenerate sheaf has degree a on the ﬁrst line, and degree b on the second. Also,
complex conjugation interchanges the two lines, so interchanges S′
a,b and S′
b,a.
Suppose PicX/S exists. Then PicX/S ×SS′ = PicX′/S′ by Exercise 4.4. Since
the closed points of S′
a,b and S′
b,a are conjugate, they map to the same point of
PicX/S. This point lies in an aﬃne open subscheme U. So the two closed points lie
in the preimage U ′ of U in PicX′/S′. But U ′ is aﬃne since U, S and S′ are aﬃne.
However, if a ̸= b, then the two closed points are distinct, and so lie in no common
aﬃne U ′. We have a contradiction. Thus PicX/S cannot exist.
Finally, let’s prove PicX′/S′ is representable by ∐S′
n. First, note X′ is regular;
in fact, in P2
C × A1
C, the equation x2 + y2 = t deﬁnes a smooth surface. So on X′
every reduced curve is an eﬀective divisor. In particular, consider these three: the
line L : x = √−1y, t = 0, the line M : x = −√−1y, t = 0, and the image A of the
section g of fS′ deﬁned above.
Set P′
a,b := OX′(bL + nA) where n = a + b. The restriction to the generic ﬁber
P′
a,b|X′
σ has degree n since L ∩X′
σ is empty and A is the image of a section. And
P′
a,b|M has degree b since A∩M is empty and L∩M is a reduced C-rational point.
And P′
a,b|L has degree a since, in addition, OX′(L) ⊗OX′(M) ≃OX′ as the ideal
of L + M is generated by t. Lastly, every invertible sheaf on S′ is trivial; ﬁx a
g-rigidiﬁcation OS′
∼
−→g∗P′, and use it to identify the two sheaves.
On X′ ×S′ ∐S′
n, form an invertible sheaf P′ by placing P′
a,b on S′
a,b; plainly, the
P′
a,b patch together. It now suﬃces to show this: given any S′-scheme T and any
invertible sheaf L on on X′
T , there exist a unique S′-map q: T →∐S′
n and some
invertible sheaf N on T such that (1 × q)∗P′ ≃L ⊗f ∗
T N.
Replace L by L ⊗f ∗
T g∗
T L−1. Then g∗
T L = OT since g∗
T f ∗
T = 1. Hence, if q and
N exist, then necessarily N ≃OT since g∗
T (1 × q)∗P′ = q∗g∗P′ and g∗P′ = OS′.
Plainly, we may assume T is connected. Then the function s 7→χ(X′
t, Lt) is
constant on T by [EGA III2, 7.9.5]. Set n := χ(X′
t, Lt) −1.
Fix a, b with a + b = n. Set
M := L−1 ⊗(1 × τ)∗P′
a,b and N := fT∗M.
Plainly g∗
T M = OT . Form the natural map u: f ∗
T N →M.
Let Tσ be the generic ﬁber of the structure map τ : T →S′. Then Tσ ⊂T is
open. Let t ∈Tσ. Then X′
t is a nondegenerate plane conic with a rational point
At. So X′
t ≃P1
kt. Hence Lt ≃OX′
t(nAt). So Mt ≃OX′
t. Hence H1(X′
t, Mt) = 0
and H0(X′
t, Mt) = kt by Serre’s explicit computation [EGA III1, 2.1.12].
Therefore, N is invertible at t, and forming N commutes with passing to X′
t,
owing to the theory in Subsection 3.10. So forming u: f ∗
T N →M commutes with
passing to X′
t too. But u is an isomorphism on X′
t. Hence u is surjective along X′
t by
Nakayama’s lemma. But both source and target of u are invertible along X′
t. Hence
u is an isomorphism along X′
t, so over Tσ as t ∈Tσ is arbitrary. Now, g∗
T M = OT
and g∗
T f ∗
T = 1. Hence N|Tσ = OTσ. Therefore, L|X′
Tσ = (1 × τ)∗P′
a,b|X′
Tσ.
Let T ′
a,b be the set of t ∈T such that τ(t) ∈S′ is the closed point and L|Lt
has degree a and L|Mt has degree b. Fix t ∈T ′
a,b. Then M|Lt has degree 0, so


PDF PAGE 33
THE PICARD SCHEME
33
M|Lt ≃OLt. Similarly, M|Mt ≃OMt. Consider the natural short exact sequence
0 →OLt(−1) →OX′
t →OMt →0.
Twist by M and take cohomology. Thus H1(X′
t, Mt) = 0 and H0(X′
t, Mt) = kt.
Hence, on X′
t, the map u becomes a map OX′
t →Mt. This map is surjective as it
is surjective after restriction to Lt and to Mt. So this map is an isomorphism.
As above, we conclude u is an isomorphism on an open neighborhood V ′ of X′
t.
Set W ′ := fT ′(X′
T −V ′). Since f is proper, W ′ is open. But f −1W ′ ⊂V ′. So u is
an isomorphism over W ′. Hence OX′
t′
∼
−→Mt′ for all t′ ∈W ′. So W ′ ⊂T ′
a,b ∪Tσ.
Set Ta,b := T ′
a,b ∪Tσ. Then Ta,b ⊂T is open as it contains a neighborhood of
each of its points. Furthermore, u is an isomorphism over Ta,b. Hence N|Tσ = OTσ,
again since g∗
T M = OT and g∗
T f ∗
T = 1. Therefore, L|X′
Ta,b = (1 × τ)∗P′
a,b|X′
Ta,b.
Let qa,b : Ta,b →∐S′
n be the composition of the structure map τ : T →S′ and
the inclusion of S′ in S′
n as S′
a,b. Plainly (1 × qa,b)∗P′ = L|X′
Ta,b. Plainly, as a
and b and n vary, the qa,b patch to a map q: T →∐S′
n such that (1 × q)∗P′ = L.
Plainly this map q is the only S′-map q such that (1 × q)∗P′ ≃L ⊗f ∗
T N for some
invertible sheaf N on T . Thus ∐S′
n represents PicX′/S′, and P′ is a universal sheaf.
Exercise 4.15. Assume X = P(E) where E is a locally free sheaf on S and is
everywhere of rank at least 2. Show PicX/S exists, and represents PicX/S; in fact,
PicX/S = ZS where ZS stands for the disjoint union of copies of S indexed by Z.
Exercise 4.16. Consider the curve X/R of Exercise 2.4. Show PicX/S = ZR.
Proposition 4.17. If PicX/S exists and represents Pic(X/S) (fppf), then PicX/S
is locally of ﬁnite type.
Proof. Set P := Pic(X/S) (fppf). Owing to [EGA IV3, 8.14.2], we just need to
check the following condition. For every ﬁltered inverse system of aﬃne S-schemes
Ti, the natural map is a bijection:
lim
−→P(Ti)
∼
−→P
 lim
←−Ti

.
To check it is injective, set T := lim
←−Ti. Fix i and let λi ∈P(Ti). Represent λi
by a sheaf L′
i on XT ′
i where T ′
i →Ti is an fppf covering. Set T ′ := T ′
i ×Ti T . Set
L′ := Li|XT ′. Let λ be the image of λi in P(T ). Then L′ represents λ.
Suppose λ = 0 ∈P(T ). Then there exists an fppf covering T ′′ →T ′ such that
L′|XT ′′ ≃OXT ′′ . It follows from [EGA IV3, 8.8.2, 8.10.5(vi), 11.2.6, 8.5.2(i), and
8.5.2.4] that there exist a j ≥i and an fppf covering T ′′
j →T ′
j with T ′
j := T ′
i ×Tj T
such that L′|XT ′′
j ≃OXT ′′
j . So λi maps to 0 ∈P(Tj). Thus the map is injective.
Surjectivity can be proved similarly.
□
Remark 4.18. There are three important existence theorems for PicX/S, which
reﬁne Theorem 4.8. They were proved soon after it, and each involves new ideas.
First, Mumford proved the following generalization of Theorem 4.8, and it ﬁts
in nicely with Example 4.14.
Theorem 4.18.1. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat, and its geometric ﬁbers
are reduced and connected; assume the irreducible components of its ordinary ﬁbers
are geometrically irreducible. Then PicX/S exists.


PDF PAGE 34
34
S. L. KLEIMAN
Mumford stated this theorem at the bottom of Page viii in [Mm66]. He said
the proof is a generalization of that [Mm66, Lects. 19–21] in the case where S is
the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld and X is a smooth surface. That proof
is based on his theory of independent 0-cycles. This theory is further developed
in [AK79, pp. 23–28] and used to prove [AK79, Thm. (3.1)], which asserts the
existence of a natural compactiﬁcation of PicX/S when X/S is ﬂat and locally
projective with integral geometric ﬁbers.
On the other hand, Grothendieck [FGA, p. 236-1] attributed to Mumford a
slightly diﬀerent theorem, in which neither the geometric ﬁbers nor the ordinary
ﬁbers are assumed connected (see [BLR, p. 210] also). Grothendieck said the proof
is based on a reﬁnement of Mumford’s construction of quotients, and referred to
the forthcoming notes of a Harvard seminar of Mumford and Tate’s, held in the
spring of 1962.
Mumford was kind enough, in November 2003, to mail the present author
his personal folder of handwritten notes from the seminar; the folder is labeled,
“Groth–Mumford–Tate,” and contains notes from talks by each of the three, and
notes written by each of them. Virtually all the content has appeared elsewhere;
Mumford’s contributions appeared in Mumford’s books [Mm65], [Mm66], and
[Mm70].
The notes contain, in Mumford’s hand, a precise statement of the theorem
and a rough sketch of the proof.
This statement too is slightly diﬀerent from
that of Theorem 4.18.1: he crossed out the hypothesis that the geometric ﬁbers
are connected; and he made the weaker assumption that the ordinary ﬁbers are
connected. The proof is broadly like his proof in [Mm66, Lects. 19–21].
Second, Grothendieck proved this theorem of “generic representability.”
Theorem 4.18.2. Assume X/S is proper, and S is integral. Then there exists a
nonempty open subset V ⊂S such that PicXV /V exists, represents Pic(XV /V ) (fppf),
and is a disjoint union of open quasi-projective subschemes.
A particularly important special case is covered by the following corollary.
Corollary 4.18.3. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k, and X is complete.
Then PicX/k exists, represents Pic(X/k) (fppf), and is a disjoint union of open quasi-
projective subschemes.
Before Grothendieck discovered Theorem 4.18.2, he [FGA, Cor. 6.6, p. 232-
17] proved Corollary 4.18.3 assuming X/k is projective. To do so, he developed a
method of “relative representability,” by which Theorem 4.8 implies the existence
of the Picard scheme in other cases. The method incorporates a “d´evissage” of
Oort’s [Oo62, §6]; the latter yields the Picard scheme as an extension of a group
subscheme of PicXred/k by an aﬃne group scheme.
In [FGA, Rem. 6.6, p. 232-17], Grothendieck said it is “extremely plausible”
that Corollary 4.18.3 holds in general, and can be proved by extending the method of
relative representability, so that it covers the case of a surjective map X′ →X with
X′ projective, such as the map provided by Chow’s lemma [EGA II, Thm. 5.6.1].
Furthermore, he conjectured, in [FGA, Rem. 6.6, p. 232-17], that, for any surjective
map X′ →X between proper schemes over a ﬁeld, the induced map on Picard
schemes is aﬃne. He said he was led to the conjecture by considerations of “nonﬂat
descent,” a version of descent theory where the maps are not required to be ﬂat,
but the objects are.


PDF PAGE 35
THE PICARD SCHEME
35
Thanking Grothendieck for help, Murre [Mr63, (II.15)] gave the ﬁrst proof of
the heart of Corollary 4.18.3: if X/k is proper, then PicX/k exists and is locally of
ﬁnite type. Murre did not use the method of relative representability. Rather, he
identiﬁed seven conditions [Mr63, (I.2.1)] that are necessary and suﬃcient for the
representability of a functor from schemes over a ﬁeld to Abelian groups. Then he
showed the seven are satisﬁed by the Picard functor localized in the fpqc topology.
To handle the last two conditions, he used Chow’s lemma and Theorem 4.8.
In the meantime, Grothendieck had proved Theorem 4.18.2, according to Murre
[Mr63, p. 5]. Later, the proof appeared in two parts. The ﬁrst part established a
key intermediate result, the following theorem.
Theorem 4.18.4. Assume X/S is proper. Let F be a coherent sheaf on X, and
SF ⊂S the subfunctor of all S-schemes T such that FT is T -ﬂat. Then SF is
representable by an unramiﬁed S-scheme of ﬁnite type.
Murre sketched Grothendieck’s proof of this theorem in [Mr65, Cor. 1, p. 294-
11]. The proof involves identifying and checking eight conditions that are necessary
and suﬃcient for the representability of a functor by a separated and unramiﬁed
S-scheme locally of ﬁnite type. As in Murre’s proof of Corollary 4.18.3, a key step
is to show the functor is “pro-representable”: there exist certain natural topological
rings, and if the functor is representable by Y , then these rings are the completions
of the local rings at the points of Y that are closed in their ﬁbers over S.
In the second part of Grothendieck’s proof of Theorem 4.18.2, the main result
is the following theorem of relative representability.
Theorem 4.18.5. Assume S is integral. Let X′ →X be a surjective map of
proper S-schemes. Then there is a nonempty open subset V ⊂S such that the map
Pic(XV /V ) (fppf) →Pic(X′
V /V ) (fppf)
is representable by quasi-aﬃne maps of ﬁnite type.
In other words, for every S-scheme T and map T →Pic(X′
V /V ) (fppf), the ﬁbered
product Pic(XV /V ) (fppf) ×Pic(X′
V /V ) (fppf)T is representable and its projection to T is
a quasi-aﬃne map of ﬁnite type between schemes.
Raynaud [Ra71, Thm. 1.1] gave Grothendieck’s proof of Theorem 4.18.5; the
main ingredients are, indeed, Oort d´evissage and nonﬂat descent. As a ﬁrst con-
sequence, Raynaud [Ra71, Cor. 1.2] derived Theorem 4.18.2. In order to show
PicX/S is a disjoint union of open quasi-projective subschemes, he used a ﬁniteness
theorem for PicX/S, which Grothendieck had stated under (v) in [FGA, p. C-08],
and which is proved below as Theorem 6.16. As a second consequence of Theo-
rem 4.18.5, Raynaud [Ra71, Cors. 1.5] established Grothendieck’s conjecture that,
over a ﬁeld, a surjective map of proper schemes induces an aﬃne map on Picard
schemes.
The third important existence theorem for PicX/S is due to M. Artin, whose
work greatly clariﬁes the situation. Artin proved PicX/S exists when it should, but
not as a scheme. Rather, it exists as a more general object, called an “algebraic
space,” which is closer in nature to a (complex) analytic space.
Grothendieck [FGA, Rem. 5.2, p. 232-13] had said: “it is not ruled out that
PicX/S exists whenever X/S is proper and ﬂat and such that OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds
universally. At least, this statement is proved in the context of analytic spaces
when X/S is, in addition, projective.” Mumford’s example, Example 4.14, shows
the statement is false for schemes; Artin’s theorem shows the statement holds for


PDF PAGE 36
36
S. L. KLEIMAN
algebraic spaces.
Algebraic spaces were introduced by Artin [Ar68, §1], and the theory devel-
oped by himself and his student Knutson [Kn71]. The spaces are constructed by
gluing together schemes along open subsets that are isomorphic locally in the ´etale
topology. Over C, these open sets are locally analytically isomorphic; so an alge-
braic space is a kind of complex analytic space. In general and more formally, an
algebraic space is the quotient in the category of ´etale sheaves of a scheme divided
by an ´etale equivalence relation.
Artin [Ar67, Thm. 3.4, p. 35], proceeding in the spirit of Grothendieck and
Murre, identiﬁed ﬁve conditions on a functor that are necessary and suﬃcient for it
to be a locally separated algebraic space that is locally of ﬁnite type over a ﬁeld or
over an excellent Dedekind domain. In the proof of necessity, a key new ingredient
is Artin’s approximation theorem; it implies that the topological rings given by pro-
representability can be algebraized. The resulting schemes are then glued together
via an ´etale equivalence relation.
By checking that the ﬁve conditions hold, Artin [Ar67, Thm. 7.3, p. 67] proved
the following theorem.
Theorem 4.18.6. Let f : X →S be a ﬂat, proper, and ﬁnitely presented map
of algebraic spaces.
Assume forming f∗OX commutes with changing S (or f is
“cohomologically ﬂat in dimension zero”).
Then PicX/S exists as an algebraic
space, which is locally of ﬁnite presentation over S.
Since f is ﬁnitely presented, the statement can be reduced to the case where S is
locally of ﬁnite type over a ﬁeld or over an excellent Dedekind domain. Artin’s proof
of Theorem 4.18.6 is direct: it involves no reduction whatsoever to Theorem 4.8.
On the other hand, it is not known, in general, whether Theorem 4.18.6 implies
Theorem 4.8, which asserts PicX/S is a scheme. However, more is known over a
ﬁeld. Indeed, given an algebraic space that is locally of ﬁnite type over a ﬁeld,
Artin [Ar67, Lem. 4.2, p. 43] proved this: if the space is a sheaf of groups, then it
is a group scheme. Thus Theorem 4.18.6 implies the heart of Corollary 4.18.3.
Thus, in Theorem 4.18.6, the ﬁbers over S of the algebraic space PicX/S are
schemes; they are the Picard schemes of the ﬁbers Xs, though the Xs need not
be schemes. In particular, if S and X are schemes — so the Xs are too — then
the PicXs/ks are schemes. Furthermore, then they form a family; its total space
PicX/S is an algebraic space, but not necessarily a scheme.
5. The connected component of the identity
Having treated the existence of the Picard scheme PicX/S, we now turn to its
structure. In this section, we study the union Pic0
X/S of the connected components
of the identity element, Pic0
Xs/ks, for s ∈S.
We establish a number of basic
properties, especially when S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld.
It is remarkable how much we can prove about Pic0
X/S formally, or nearly so,
from general principles. Notably, we can do without the ﬁniteness theorems proved
in the next section. In order to emphasize the formal nature and corresponding gen-
erality of the arguments, most of the results are stated with the general hypothesis
that PicX/S exists instead of with speciﬁc hypotheses that imply it exists.
Lemma 5.1. Let k be a ﬁeld, and G a group scheme locally of ﬁnite type. Let
G0 denote the connected component of the identity element e.


PDF PAGE 37
THE PICARD SCHEME
37
(1) Then G is separated.
(2) Then G is smooth if it has a geometrically reduced open subscheme.
(3) Then G0 is an open and closed group subscheme of ﬁnite type; it is geomet-
rically irreducible; and forming it commutes with extending k.
Proof. Since e is a k-point, it is closed. Deﬁne a map α: G × G →G on T -
points by α(g, h) := gh−1. Then α−1e ⊂G × G is a closed subscheme. Its T -points
are just the pairs (g, g) for g ∈G(T ); so α−1e is the diagonal. Thus (1) holds.
Suppose G has a geometrically reduced open subscheme V .
To prove G is
smooth, we may replace k by its algebraic closure. Then V contains a nonempty
smooth open subscheme W. Furthermore, given any two closed points g, h ∈G,
there is an automorphism of G that carries g to h, namely, multiplication by g−1h.
Taking g ∈W, we conclude that G is smooth at h. Thus (2) holds.
Consider (3). By deﬁnition, G0 is the largest connected subspace containing
e. But the closure of a connected subspace is plainly connected; so G0 is closed.
By [EGA I, 6.1.9], in any locally Noetherian topological space, the connected
components are open. Thus G0 is open too.
Since G0 is connected and has a k-point, G0 is geometrically connected by
[EGA IV2, 4.5.14]. Thus forming G0 commutes with extending k.
Furthermore, G0 × G0 is connected by [EGA IV2, 4.5.8]. So α(G0 × G0) ⊂G
is connected, and contains e, so lies in G0. Thus G0 is a subgroup.
To prove G0 is geometrically irreducible and quasi-compact, we may replace k
by its algebraic closure. Then G0
red × G0
red is reduced by [EGA IV2, 4.6.1]. Hence
α induces a map from G0
red × G0
red into G0
red. So G0
red is a subgroup. Thus we may
replace G0 by G0
red.
Since G0 is reduced and k is algebraically closed, G0 contains a nonempty
smooth aﬃne open subscheme U. Take arbitrary k-points g ∈U and h ∈G0. Then
hg−1U is smooth and open, and contains h. Hence G0 is irreducible locally at h.
But h is arbitrary, and G0 is connected. So G0 is irreducible by [EGA I, 6.1.10].
Since G0 is irreducible, its open subschemes U and hU meet. So their intersec-
tion contains a k-point g1 since k is algebraically closed. Then g1 = hh1 for some a
k-point h1 ∈U. Then h = g1h−1
1 . But h ∈G0 is arbitrary. Hence α(U × U) = G0.
Now, U ×U is aﬃne, so quasi-compact. Hence G0 is quasi-compact. By hypothesis,
G is locally of ﬁnite type. Hence G0 is of ﬁnite type. Thus (3) holds.
□
Remark 5.2. Let G be a group scheme of ﬁnite type over a ﬁeld, Gred its reduc-
tion. Then Gred need not be a group subscheme, because Gred × Gred need not be
reduced. Waterhouse [Wa79, p. 53] gives two conditions equivalent to reducedness
when G is ﬁnite in Exercise 9, and he gives a counterexample in Exercise 10.
Proposition 5.3. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume PicX/k exists
and represents Pic(X/k) (fppf). Then PicX/k is separated, and it is smooth if it has
a geometrically reduced open subscheme. Furthermore, the connected component
of the identity Pic0
X/k is an open and closed group subscheme of ﬁnite type; it is
geometrically irreducible; and forming it commutes with extending k.
Proof. This result follows formally from Proposition 4.17 and Lemma 5.1.
□
Theorem 5.4. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume X/k is projective
and geometrically integral. Then Pic0
X/k exists and is quasi-projective. If also X/k
is geometrically normal, then Pic0
X/k is projective.


PDF PAGE 38
38
S. L. KLEIMAN
Proof. Theorem 4.8 implies PicX/k exists and represents Pic(X/k) (´et), so
Pic(X/k) (fppf).
Hence Pic0
X/k exists and is of ﬁnite type by Proposition 5.3 (in
fact, here Proposition 4.17 is logically unnecessary since PicX/k is locally of ﬁnite
type by Theorem 4.8). So Pic0
X/k is quasi-projective by Exercise 4.11.
Suppose X is also geometrically normal. Since Pic0
X/k is quasi-projective, to
prove it is projective, it suﬃces to prove it is proper.
By Lemma 5.1, forming
Pic0
X/k commutes with extending k. And by [EGA IV2, 2.7.1(vii)], a k-scheme is
complete if (and only if) it is after extending k. So we may, and do, assume k is
algebraically closed.
Recall the structure theorem of Chevalley and Rosenlicht for algebraic groups,
or reduced connected group schemes of ﬁnite type over k; see [Co02, Thm. 1.1,
p. 3]. The theorem says that every algebraic group is an extension of an Abelian
variety (or complete algebraic group) by a linear (or aﬃne) algebraic group. Recall
also that every solvable linear algebraic k-group is triangularizable (the Lie–Kolchin
theorem); so, if it’s nontrivial, then it contains a copy of the multiplicative group or
of the additive group; see [Bo69, (10.5) and (10.2)]. Now, PicX/k is commutative,
so solvable. Hence it suﬃces to show that, if T denotes the aﬃne line minus the
origin, then every k-map t: T →(Pic0
X/k)red is constant.
Since k is algebraically closed, X/k has a section. So t arises from an invertible
sheaf L on X × T by the Comparison Theorem, Theorem 2.5.
Since X × T is
integral, there is a divisor D such that O(D) = L by [Ha83, Ex. II, 6.15, p. 145].
Form the projection p: X × T →X.
Restrict L to its generic ﬁber.
This
restriction is trivial as T is an open subset of the line.
So there is a rational
function φ on X × T such that (φ) + D restricts to the trivial divisor. Let s: X →
X × T be a section. Set E := s∗((φ) + D); then E is a well-deﬁned divisor on X.
Plainly, p∗E and (φ) + D coincide as cycles; whence, they coincide as divisors by
[AK70, Prp. (3.10), p. 139], since X × T is normal. Therefore, L = p∗O(E). Thus
t: T →PicX/k is constant.
□
Corollary 5.5. Assume S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld k.
Assume X is projective and integral. Set P := Pic0
X/k, and let P be the restriction
to XP of a Poincar´e sheaf. Then a Poincar´e family W exists; by deﬁnition, W is
a relative eﬀective divisor on XP /P such that
OXP
 W −(W0 × P)

≃P ⊗f ∗
P N
where W0 is the ﬁber over 0 ∈P and where N is an invertible sheaf on P.
Proof. Note that P exists and is quasi-projective by Theorem 5.4 and that P
exists by Exercise 3.11 and Exercise 4.3. Since P is Noetherian, Serre’s Theorem
[EGA III1, 2.2.1] implies there is an N such that RifP∗P(n) = 0 for all i > 0 and
n ≥N. Recall that (4.8.2) implies (4.8.3); similarly, Hi(Pt(n)) = 0 for all t ∈P.
Fix an n ≥N such that dim H0(OX(n)) > dim P.
Say λ ∈PicX/k represents OX(n).
Form the automorphism of PicX/k of
multiplication by λ. Plainly, P is carried onto the connected component, P ′ say, of
λ. Let q: P
∼
−→P ′ be the induced isomorphism. Let P′ be the restriction to XP ′
of a Poincar´e sheaf. Plainly, (1 × q)∗P′ ≃P(n) ⊗f ∗
P N for some invertible sheaf N.
By Exercise 4.7, there is a coherent sheaf Q on P such that P(Q) = DivX/S.
Moreover, Q|P ′ is locally free of rank dim H0(OX(n)) owing to Subsection 3.10.
So Q|P ′ is of rank at least 1 + dim P. Now, there is an m such that the sheaf


PDF PAGE 39
THE PICARD SCHEME
39
Hom(Q|P ′, OP )(m) is generated by ﬁnitely many global sections; so a general linear
combination of them vanishes nowhere by a well-known lemma [Mm66, p. 148]
attributed to Serre. Hence there is a surjection Q|P ′ ։ OP (m). Correspondingly,
there is a P ′-map h′ : P ′ →P(Q|P ′); in other words, h′ is a section of the restriction
over P ′ of the Abel map AX/S : DivX/S →PicX/S.
Let W ′ ⊂XP ′ be the pullback under 1 × h′ of the universal relative eﬀective
divisor. Then OXP ′(W ′) = P′ since h′ is a section of AX/S|P ′. So, in particular,
OX(W ′
λ) = OX(n). Set W := (1 × q)−1W ′. Plainly, W is a Poincar´e family.
□
Remark 5.6. More generally, Theorem 5.4 holds whenever X/k is proper,
whether X is integral or not.
The proof is essential the same, but uses Corol-
lary 4.18.3 in place of Theorem 4.8. In fact, the proof of the quasi-projectivity
assertion is easier, and does not require Proposition 5.3, since Pic0
X/k is given
as contained in a quasi-projective scheme. On the other hand, the proof of the
projectivity assertion requires an additional step: the reduction, when k is alge-
braically closed, to the case where X is irreducible.
Here is the idea: since X
is normal, X is the disjoint union of its irreducible components Xi, and plainly
PicX/k = Q PicXi/k; hence, if the Pic0
Xi/k are complete, so is Pic0
X/k.
Chow [Ch57, Thm. p. 128] proved every algebraic group — indeed, every homo-
geneous variety — is quasi-projective. Hence, in Lemma 5.1 , if G is reduced, then
G0 is quasi-projective. In characteristic 0, remarkably G is smooth, so reduced;
this result is generally attributed to Cartier, and is proved in [Mm66, p. 167].
It follows that Theorem 5.4 holds in characteristic 0 whenever X is a proper
algebraic k-space.
Indeed, the quasi-projectivity assertion holds in view of the
preceding discussion and of the discussion at the end of Remark 4.18. The proof of
the projectivity assertion has one more complication: it is necessary to work with
an ´etale covering U →X where U is a scheme and with an invertible sheaf L on
U × T . However, the proof shows that, in arbitrary characteristic, if X is a proper
and normal algebraic k-space, then Pic0
X/k is proper.
Exercise 5.7. Assume X/S is projective and smooth, its geometric ﬁbers are
irreducible, and S is Noetherian. Using the Valuative Criterion [Ha83, Thm. 4.7,
p. 101] rather than the Chevalley–Rosenlicht structure theorem, prove that a closed
subscheme Z ⊂PicX/S is projective over S if it is of ﬁnite type.
Remark 5.8. There are three interesting alternative proofs of the second as-
sertion of Theorem 5.4. The ﬁrst alternative uses Exercise 5.7. It was sketched by
Grothendieck [FGA, p. 236-12], and runs basically as follows. Proceed by induc-
tion on the dimension r of X/k. If r = 0, then Pic0
X/k is S, so trivially projective.
If r = 1, then Pic0
X/k is projective by Exercise 5.7.
Suppose r ≥2. As in the proof of the theorem, reduce to the case where k is
algebraically closed. Let Y be a general hyperplane section of X. Then Y too is
normal [Se50, Thm. 7′, p. 376]. Plainly the inclusion ϕ: Y ֒→X induces a map
ϕ∗: Pic0
X/k →Pic0
Y/k .
By induction, Pic0
Y/k is projective. So Pic0
X/k is projective too if ϕ∗is ﬁnite.
In order to handle ϕ∗, Grothendieck suggested using a version of the “known
equivalence criteria.”
In this connection, he [FGA, p. 236-02] announced that
[SGA 2] contains some key preliminary results, which must be combined with the
existence theorems for the Picard scheme. In fact, [SGA 2, Cor. 3.6, p. 153] does


PDF PAGE 40
40
S. L. KLEIMAN
directly imply ϕ∗is injective for r ≥3. Hence ϕ∗is generically ﬁnite. So ϕ∗is
ﬁnite since it is homogeneous.
For any r ≥2, [Kl73, Lem. 3.11, p. 639, and Rem. 3.12, p. 640] assert ker ϕ∗
is ﬁnite and unipotent, so trivial in characteristic 0; however, the proofs in [Kl73]
require the compactness of Pic0
X/k. It would be good to have a direct proof of this
assertion also when r = 2, a proof in the spirit of [SGA 2].
In characteristic 0, Mumford [Mm67, p. 99] proved as follows ker ϕ∗vanishes.
Suppose not. First of all, kerϕ∗is reduced by Cartier’s theorem. So ker ϕ∗contains
a point λ of order n > 1. And λ deﬁnes an unramiﬁed Galois cover X′/X with
group Z/n. Set Y ′ := Y ×X X′. Then Y ′ is a disjoint union of n copies of Y because
λ ∈ker ϕ∗. On the other hand, Y ′ is ample since Y is; hence, Y ′ is connected (by
Corollary B.29 for example). We have a contradiction. Thus ker ϕ∗vanishes.
In characteristic 0, the injectivity of ϕ∗also follows from the Kodaira Vanishing
Theorem. Indeed, as just noted, ker ϕ∗is reduced. So ϕ∗is injective if and only if
its diﬀerential is zero. Now, this diﬀerential is, owing to Theorem 5.11 below, equal
to the natural map
H1(OX) →H1(OY ).
Its kernel is equal to H1(OX(−1)) owing to the long exact sequence of cohomology.
In characteristic 0, if X is smooth, then H1(OX(−1)) vanishes by the Kodaira
Vanishing Theorem. If also r = 2, then the dual group H1(Ω2
X(1)) vanishes by the
theorem on the regularity of the adjoint system, which was proved by Picard in 1906
using Abelian integrals and by Severi in 1908 using algebro-geometric methods. For
more information, see [Za35, pp. 181, 204–206] and [Mm67, pp. 94–97].
For any r ≥2, there are, as Grothendieck [FGA, p. 236-12] suggested, ﬁnitely
many smooth irreducible curves Yi ⊂X such that the induced map is injective:
Pic0
X/k →Q Pic0
Yi/k .
So, again, since the Pic0
Yi/k are projective, Pic0
X/k is projective too.
To ﬁnd the Yi, use the ﬁnal version of the “equivalence criteria” proved by Weil
[We54, Cor. 2, p. 159]; it says in other words that, if W/T is the family of smooth
1-dimensional linear-space sections of X (or even a nonempty open subfamily), then
the induced map is injective:
Pic0
X/k(k) →Pic0
W/T (T ).
For each ﬁnite set F of k-points of T , let KF be the kernel of the map
Pic0
X/k →Q
t∈F PicWt/k .
Since KF is closed, we may assume, by Noetherian induction, that KF contains
no strictly smaller KG. Suppose KF has a nonzero k-point. It yields a nonzero
T -point of PicW/T , so a nonzero k-point of PicWt/k for some k-point t of T . Let
G be the union of F and {t}. Then KG is strictly smaller than KF . So KF = 0.
Take the Yi to be the Wt for t ∈F.
In characteristic 0 or if r = 2, another way to ﬁnish is to take a desingularization
ϑ: X′ →X. Since X is normal, a divisor D on X is principal if ϑ∗D is principal;
hence, the induced map
ϑ∗: Pic0
X/k →Pic0
X′/k
is injective. But Pic0
X′/k is projective by Exercise 5.7. So Pic0
X/k is projective too.


PDF PAGE 41
THE PICARD SCHEME
41
The second alternative proof of Theorem 5.4 is similar to the proof in An-
swer 5.7.
(It too may be due to Grothendieck — see [EGA IV4, 21.14.4, iv] —
but was indicated to the author by Mumford in a private communication in 1974).
Again we reduce to the case where k is algebraically closed. Then, using a more re-
ﬁned form of the Valuative Criterion (obtained modifying [Ha83, Ex. 4.11, p. 107]
slightly), we need only check this statement: given a k-scheme T of the form
T = Spec(C) where C is a complete discrete valuation ring with algebraically
closed residue ﬁeld k0, and with fraction ﬁeld K say, and given a divisor D on XK,
its closure D′ is a divisor on XT .
This statement follows from the Ramanujam–Samuel Theorem [EGA IV4,
21.14.1], a result in commutative algebra. Apply it taking B to be the local ring
of a closed point of XT , and A to be the local ring of the image point in Xk0. The
hypotheses hold because A and B share the residue ﬁeld k0. The completion bA is
a normal domain by a theorem of Zariski’s [ZS60, Thm. 32, p. 320]. And A →B
is formally smooth because C is a formal power series ring over k0 by a theorem of
Cohen’s [ZS60, Thm. 32, p. 320].
The third alternative proof is somewhat like the second, but involves some ge-
ometry instead of the Ramanujam–Samuel Theorem; see [AK74, Thm. 19, p. 138].
Moreover, C need not be complete, just discrete, and k0 need not be algebraically
closed. Here is the idea. Let E ⊂Xk0 be the closed ﬁber of D′/T . In HilbXL/L,
form the sets U and V parameterizing the divisorial cycles linearly equivalent to
those of the form DL+H and EL+H as H ranges over the divisors whose associated
sheaves are algebraically equivalent to OXL(n) for a suitably large n.
It can be shown that U and V are dense open subsets of the same irreducible
component of HilbXL/L. Hence they have a common point. Let I and J be the
ideals of D and E. Then there are invertible sheaves L and M on XL such that
IL ⊗L and JL ⊗M are isomorphic. Since IL is invertible, so is JL. Hence so is J.
Thus E is a divisor, as desired.
More generally, if X is not necessarily projective, but is simply complete and
normal, then Pic0
X/k is still complete, whether X is a scheme or algebraic space.
Indeed, the original proof and its second alternative work without essential change.
The ﬁrst and third alternatives require X to be projective. However, it is easy to
see as follows that this case implies the general case.
Namely, we may assume k is algebraically closed. By Chow’s lemma, there is a
projective variety Y and a birational map γ : Y →X. Since X and Y are normal,
a divisor D on X is the divisor of a function h if and only if γ∗D is the divisor of
γ∗h. Hence the induced map Pic0
X/k →Pic0
Y/k is injective. It follows, as above,
that Pic0
X/k is complete since Pic0
Y/k is.
Definition 5.9. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k.
Let L and N be
invertible sheaves on X. Then L is said to be algebraically equivalent to N if, for
some n and all i with 1 ≤i ≤n, there exist a connected k-scheme of ﬁnite type
Ti, geometric points si, ti of Ti with the same ﬁeld, and an invertible sheaf Mi on
XTi such that
Ls1 ≃M1,s1, M1,t1 ≃M2,s2, . . . , Mn−1,tn−1 ≃Mn,sn, Mn,tn ≃Ntn.
Proposition 5.10. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume PicX/k
exists and represents Pic(X/k) (fppf). Let L be an invertible sheaf on X, and λ ∈
PicX/k the corresponding point. Then L is algebraically equivalent to OX if and


PDF PAGE 42
42
S. L. KLEIMAN
only if λ ∈Pic0
X/k.
Proof. Suppose L is algebraically equivalent to OX, and use the notation of
Deﬁnition 5.9. Then Mi deﬁnes a map τi : Ti →PicX/k. Now, Mn,tn ≃OXtn.
So τn(tn) ∈Pic0
X/k. Suppose τi(ti) ∈Pic0
X/k. Then τi(Ti) ⊂Pic0
X/k since Ti is
connected. So τi(si) ∈Pic0
X/k. But Mi,si ≃Mi−1,ti−1. So τi−1(ti−1) ∈Pic0
X/k.
Descending induction yields τ1(s1) ∈Pic0
X/k. But M1,s1 ≃Ls1. Thus λ ∈Pic0
X/k.
Conversely, suppose λ ∈Pic0
X/k. The inclusion Pic0
X/k ֒→PicX/k is deﬁned
by an invertible sheaf M on XT for some fppf covering T →Pic0
X/k. Let t1, t2
be geometric points of T lying over λ, 0 ∈Pic0
X/k. Let T1, T2 ⊂T be irreducible
components containing t1, t2, and T ′
1, T ′
2 ⊂Pic0
X/k their images. The latter contain
open subsets because an fppf map is open by [EGA IV2, 2.4.6]. Since Pic0
X/k is
irreducible by Lemma 5.1 , these open subsets contain a common point. Say it is
the image of geometric points t1, s2 of T1, T2. Then M1,t1 ≃M2,s2 by Exercise 2.6.
Set Mi := M|Ti. Thus L is algebraically equivalent to OX.
□
Theorem 5.11. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume PicX/k exists
and represents Pic(X/k) (´et). Let T0 PicX/k denote the tangent space at 0. Then
T0 PicX/k = H1(OX).
Proof. Let P be any k-scheme locally of ﬁnite type, e ∈P a rational point,
A its local ring, and m its maximal ideal. Usually, by the “tangent space” TeP
is meant the Zariski tangent space Hom(m/m2, k).
However, as in diﬀerential
geometry, TeP may be viewed as the vector space of k-derivations δ: A →k.
Indeed, δ(m2) = 0; so δ induces a linear map m/m2 →k. Conversely, every such
linear map arises from a δ, and δ is unique because δ(1) = 0.
Let kε be the ring of “dual numbers,” the ring obtained from k by adjoining an
element ε with ε2 = 0. Then any (ﬁxed) derivation δ induces a local homomorphism
of k-algebras u: A →kε by u(a) := a + δ(a)ε where a ∈k is the residue of a.
Conversely, every such u arises from a unique δ.
On the other hand, to give a u is the same as to give a k-map tε from the “free
tangent vector” Spec(kε) to P such that the image of tε has support at e. Denote
the set of tε by P(kε)e. Thus, as sets,
TeP = P(kε)e.
(5.11.1)
The vector space structure on TeP transfers as follows. Given a ∈k, deﬁne a
k-algebra homomorphism µa : kε →kε by µaε := aε. Now, let δ be a derivation,
and u the corresponding homomorphism.
Then aδ corresponds to µau.
Thus
multiplication by a transfers as P(µa): P(kε)e →P(kε)e.
Let kε,ε′ denote the ring obtained from kε by adjoining an element ε′ with
εε′ = 0 and (ε′)2 = 0. Deﬁne a homomorphism σ1 : kε,ε′ →kε by ε 7→ε and ε′ 7→0.
Deﬁne another σ2 : kε,ε′ →kε by ε 7→0 and ε′ 7→ε. The σi induce a map of sets
π: P(kε,ε′)e →P(kε)e × P(kε)e
where P(kε,ε′)e is the set of maps with image supported at e. Plainly π is bijective.
Deﬁne a third homomorphism σ: kε,ε′ →kε by ε 7→ε and ε′ 7→ε. Given two
derivations δ, δ′, deﬁne a homomorphism v: A →kε,ε′ by v(a) := a+δ(a)ε+δ′(a)ε′.
Then δ + δ′ corresponds to σv. Therefore, addition on TeP transfers as
α: P(kε)e × P(kε)e →P(kε)e where α := P(σ)π−1.


PDF PAGE 43
THE PICARD SCHEME
43
Suppose P is a group scheme, e ∈P the identity. The natural ring homomor-
phism ρ: kε →k induces a group homomorphism P(ρ): P(kε) →P(k). Plainly
P(kε)e = ker P(ρ).
(5.11.2)
The left side T0P is a vector space; the right side is a group. Does addition on the
left match multiplication on the right? Yes, indeed! We know α is the addition
map. We must show α is also the multiplication map. Let us do so.
Since π and P(σ) arise from ring homomorphisms, both are group homomor-
phisms. Now α := P(σ)π−1. Hence α is a group homomorphism too. So
α(m, n) = α(m, e) · α(e, n)
where e ∈P(kε)e is the identity. So we have to show α(m, e) = m and α(e, n) = n.
Consider the inclusion ι: kε →kε,ε′. Plainly σ2ι: kε →kε′ factors through
ρ: kε →k. Hence P(σ2)P(ι)(m) = e for any m ∈P(kε)e owing to Formula (5.11.2).
On the other hand, σ1ι is the identity of kε. Thus πP(ι)(m) = (m, e)
Plainly σι: kε →kε is also the identity of kε. So P(σ)P(ι)(m) = m. Hence
α(m, e) = P(σ)π−1πP(ι)(m) = m.
Similarly α(e, n) = n. Thus α is the multiplication map.
Take P := PicX/k, so e = 0. Then Formulas (5.11.1) and (5.11.2) yield
T0 PicX/k = ker
 PicX/k(kε) →PicX/k(k)

.
(5.11.3)
To compute this kernel, set Xε := X ⊗k kε, and form the truncated exponential
sequence of sheaves of Abelian groups:
0 →OX →O∗
Xε →O∗
X →1,
where the ﬁrst map takes a local section b to 1 + bε. This sequence is split by the
map O∗
X →O∗
Xε deﬁned by a 7→a + 0 · ε. Hence taking cohomology yields this split
exact sequence of Abelian groups:
0 →H1(OX) →H1(O∗
Xε) →H1(O∗
X) →1.
However, PicX/k represents Pic(X/k) (´et), which is the sheaf associated to the
presheaf T 7→H1(O∗
XT ). So there is a natural commutative square of groups
H1(O∗
Xε) −−−→H1(O∗
X)
y
y
PicX/k(kε) −→PicX/k(k).
(5.11.4)
Hence, there is an induced homomorphism between the horizontal kernels. Ow-
ing to Formula (5.11.3), this homomorphism is an additive map
v: H1(OX) →T0 PicX/k .
Let a ∈k. On T0 PicX/k, scalar multiplication by a is, owing to the discussion
after Formula (5.11.1), the map induced by µa : kε →kε.
Now, µa induces an
endomorphism of the above square. At the top, it arises from the map of sheaves
of groups O∗
X →O∗
X deﬁned by ε 7→aε. So the induced endomorphism of H1(OX)
is scalar multiplication by a. Thus v is a map of k-vector spaces.
Square (5.11.4) maps to the corresponding square obtained by making a ﬁeld


PDF PAGE 44
44
S. L. KLEIMAN
extension K/k. Since the kernels are vector spaces, there is an induced square
H1(OX) ⊗k K −−−→H1(OXK)
v⊗kK
y
y
T0 PicX/k ⊗kK −→T0 PicXK/K .
The two horizontal maps are isomorphisms. Hence, if the right-hand map is an
isomorphism, so is v. Thus we may assume k is algebraically closed.
In Square (5.11.4), the two vertical maps are isomorphisms by Exercise 2.3
since PicX/k represents Pic(X/k) (´et) and k is algebraically closed. Therefore, v too
is an isomorphism, as desired.
□
Remark 5.12. There is a relative version of Theorem 5.11. Namely, assume
PicX/S exists, represents Pic(X/S) (´et), and is locally of ﬁnite type, but let S be
arbitrary. Then R1f∗OX is equal to the normal sheaf of PicX/S along the identity
section, its “Lie algebra”; the latter is simply the dual of the restriction to this
section of the sheaf of relative diﬀerentials. For more information, see the recent
treatment [LLR, § 1] and the references it cites.
Corollary 5.13. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k.
Assume PicX/k
exists and represents Pic(X/k) (´et). Then
dim PicX/k ≤dim H1(OX).
Equality holds if and only if PicX/k is smooth at 0; if so, then PicX/k is smooth of
dimension dim H1(OX) everywhere.
Proof. Plainly we may assume k is algebraically closed.
Then, given any
closed point λ ∈PicX/k, there is an automorphism of PicX/k that carries 0 to λ,
namely, “multiplication” by λ. So PicX/k has the same dimension at λ as at 0,
and PicX/k is smooth at λ if and only if it is smooth at 0.
By general principles, dim0 PicX/k ≤dim T0 PicX/k, and equality holds if and
only if PicX/k is regular at 0. Moreover, PicX/k is regular at 0 if and only if it
is smooth at 0 since k is algebraically closed. Therefore, the corollary results from
Theorem 5.11.
□
Corollary 5.14. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k.
Assume PicX/k
exists and represents Pic(X/k) (´et). If k is of characteristic 0, then PicX/k is smooth
of dimension dim H1(OX) everywhere.
Proof. Since k is of characteristic 0, any group scheme locally of ﬁnite type
over k is smooth by Cartier’s theorem [Mm66, Thm. 1, p. 167]. So the assertion
follows from Corollary 5.13.
□
Remark 5.15. Over a ﬁeld k of positive characteristic, PicX/k need not be
smooth, even when X is a connected smooth projective surface. Examples were
constructed by Igusa [Ig55] and Serre [Sr56, n◦20].
On the other hand, Mumford [Mm66, Lect. 27, pp. 193–198] proved that
PicX/k is smooth if and only if all of Serre’s Bockstein operations βi vanish; here
β1 : H1(OX) →H2(OX) and βi : ker βi−1 →cok βi−1 for i ≥2.


PDF PAGE 45
THE PICARD SCHEME
45
In fact, the tangent space to PicXred/k is the subspace of H1(OX) given by
T0 PicXred/k =
\
ker βi.
Moreover, here X need not be smooth or 2-dimensional.
The examples illustrate further pathologies. Set
g := dim PicX/k, h0,1 := dim H1(OX), and h1,0 := dim H0(Ω1
X).
In Igusa’s example, g = 1, h0,1 = 2, and h1,0 = 2; in Serre’s, g = 0, h0,1 = 1, and
h1,0 = 0. Moreover, Igusa had just proved that, in any event, g ≤h1,0.
By contrast, in characteristic 0, Serre’s Comparison Theorem [Ha83, Thm. 2.1,
p. 440] says that h0,1 and h1,0 can be computed by viewing X as a complex analytic
manifold. Hence Hodge Theory yields
h0,1 = h1,0 and h0,1 + h1,0 = b
where b is the ﬁrst Betti number; see [Za35, p. 200].
Therefore, the following
exercise now yields the Fundamental Theorem of Irregular Surfaces (1.4).
Exercise 5.16. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume X is a pro-
jective, smooth, and geometrically irreducible surface. According to the original
deﬁnitions as stated in modern terms, the “geometric genus” of X is the number
pg := dim H0(Ω2
X); its “arithmetic genus” is the number pa := φ(0) −1 where φ(n)
is the polynomial such that φ(n) = dim H0(Ω2
X(n)) for n ≫0; and its “irregularity”
q is the diﬀerence between the two genera, q := pg −pa.
Show dim PicX/k ≤q, with equality in characteristic 0.
Exercise 5.17. Assume S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld k.
Assume X is projective and integral. Set q := dim H1(OX).
Show q = 0 if and only if every algebraic system of curves is “contained com-
pletely in a linear system.” The latter condition means just that, given any relative
eﬀective divisor D on XT /T where T is a connected k-scheme, there exist invertible
sheaves L on X and N on T such that OXT (D) ≃LT ⊗f ∗
T N. The condition may
be put more geometrically: in the notation of Exercise 3.14, it means there is a
map, necessarily unique, w: T →L such that (1 × w)−1W = D.
In characteristic 0, show q = 0 if the condition holds for all smooth such T .
Remark 5.18. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume X/k is projective
and geometrically integral. Let D ⊂X be an eﬀective divisor, and ND its normal
sheaf. Let δ ∈DivX/k be the point representing D, and λ ∈PicX/k the point
representing OX(D).
Then the tangent space at δ is given by the formula
Tδ DivX/k = H0(ND),
(5.18.1)
which respects the vector space structure of each side. This formula can be proved
with a simple elementary computation; see [Mm66, Cor., p. 154].
Form the fundamental exact sequence of sheaves
0 →OX →OX(D) →ND →0,
and consider its associated long exact sequence of cohomology groups
0 −→H0(OX) −→H0(OX(D)) −→H0(ND)
∂0
−→H1(OX) −→H1(OX(D))
u
−→H1(ND)
∂1
−→H2(OX)


PDF PAGE 46
46
S. L. KLEIMAN
Another elementary computation shows that the boundary map ∂0 is equal to the
tangent map of the Abel map, Tδ DivX/k →Tλ PicX/k; see [Mm66, Prp., p. 165].
By deﬁnition, D is said to be “semiregular” if the boundary map ∂1 is injective.
Plainly, it is equivalent that u = 0. So it is equivalent that dim H0(ND) = R where
R := dim H1(OX) + dim H0(OX(D)) −1 −dim H1(OX(D)).
Semiregularity was recognized in 1944 by Severi as precisely the right positivity con-
dition for the old (1904) theorem of the completeness of the characteristic system,
although Severi formulated the condition in an equivalent dual manner.
In its modern formulation, the theorem of the completeness of the characteristic
system asserts that DivX/k is smooth of dimension R at δ if and only if D is
semiregular, provided the characteristic is 0, or more generally, PicX/k is smooth.
Indeed, Formula (5.18.1) says that the characteristic system of DivX/k on D is
always equal to the complete linear system of the invertible sheaf ND. But DivX/k
can have a nilpotent or a singularity at δ. So, in eﬀect, Enriques and Severi had
simply sought conditions guaranteeing DivX/k is smooth of dimension R at δ.
The ﬁrst purely algebraic discussion of the theorem was made by Grothendieck
[FGA, Sects. 221-5.4 to 5.6], and he proved it in the two most important cases.
Speciﬁcally, he noted that, if H1(OX(D)) = 0, then the Abel map is smooth; see the
end of the proof of Theorem 4.8. Hence DivX/k is smooth at δ if and only if PicX/k
is smooth; furthermore, PicX/k is smooth in characteristic zero by Cartier’s theo-
rem. Grothendieck pointed out that this case had been treated with transcendental
means by Kodaira in 1956.
Grothendieck also observed H1(ND) houses the obstruction to deforming D in
X. Hence, if this group vanishes, then DivX/k is smooth at δ in any characteristic.
Mumford [Mm66, pp. 157–159] explicitly worked out the obstruction and its image
under ∂1. If ∂1 = 0, so if D is semiregular, then DivX/k is smooth if this image
vanishes. Inspired by work of Kodaira and Spencer in 1959, Mumford used the
exponential in characteristic 0 and proved the image vanishes. Mumford did not
use Cartier’s theorem; so the latter results from taking a D with H1(OX(D)) = 0.
A purely algebraic proof of the full completeness theorem is given in [Kl73,
Thm., p. 307]. This proof was inspired by Kempf’s (unpublished) thesis. The proof
does not use obstruction theory, but only simple formal properties of a scheme of
the form P(Q) where Q arises from an invertible sheaf F as in Subsection 3.10. This
proof works, more generally, if S is arbitrary and if X/S is projective and ﬂat and
has integral geometric ﬁbers. Here D is the divisor on the geometric ﬁber through
δ. Then provided PicX/S is smooth, DivX/S is smooth of relative dimension R at
δ if and only if D is semiregular.
There is a celebrated example, valid over an algebraically closed ﬁeld k of any
characteristic, where DivX/k is nonreduced at δ. The example was discovered by
Severi and Zappa in the 1940s, and is explained in [Mm66, pp. 155–156]. Here is
the idea. Let C be an elliptic curve, and 0 →OC →E →OC →0 the nontrivial
extension; set X := P(E).
Let D be the section of X/C deﬁned by E →OC. Then ND = OC by [Ha83,
Prp. 2.8, p. 372]; so dim Tδ DivX/k = 1. However, δ is an isolated point. Otherwise,
the connected component of δ contains a second closed point. And it represents a
curve D′ algebraically equivalent to D. So deg OD(D′) = deg ND = 0. Hence D
and D′ are disjoint. Let F be a ﬁber. Then deg OF(D) = deg OF (D′) = 1. Hence


PDF PAGE 47
THE PICARD SCHEME
47
D′ is a second section. Therefore, E is decomposable, a contradiction.
Proposition 5.19. Assume PicX/S exists and represents Pic(X/S) (´et).
Let
s ∈S be a point such that H2(OXs) = 0. Then there exists an open neighborhood
of s over which PicX/S is smooth.
Proof. By the Semicontinuity Theorem [EGA III2, 7.7.5-I)], there exists an
open neighborhood U of s such that H2(OXt) = 0 for all t ∈U. Replace S by U.
By [EGA III1, 0-10.3.1, p. 20], there is a ﬂat local homomorphism from Os into
a Noetherian local ring B whose residue ﬁeld is algebraically closed. By [EGA IV2,
6.8.3], if fB is smooth, then f : X →S is smooth along Xs. Replace S by Spec(B).
By the Inﬁnitesimal Criterion for Smoothness [SGA 1, p. 67], it suﬃces to
show this: given any S-scheme T of the form T = Spec(A) where A is an Artin
local ring that is a ﬁnite Os-algebra and given any closed subscheme R ⊂T whose
ideal I has square 0, every R-point of PicX/S lifts to a T -point.
The residue ﬁeld of A is a ﬁnite extension of ks, which is algebraically closed;
so the two ﬁelds are equal. Hence the R-point is deﬁned by an invertible sheaf on
XR by Exercise 2.3. So we want to show invertible sheaves on XR lift to XT .
Since I2 = 0, we can form the truncated exponential sequence
0 →f ∗
T I →O∗
XT →O∗
XR →1.
It yields the following exact sequence:
H1(O∗
XT ) →H1(O∗
XR) →H2(f ∗
T I).
Hence it suﬃces to show H2(f ∗
T I) = 0.
Since T is aﬃne, H2(f ∗
T I) = H0(R2fT ∗f ∗
T I) owing to [Ha83, Prp. 8.5, p. 251].
But H2(OXt) = 0 for all t ∈S. Hence R2(f ∗
T I) = 0 by the Property of Exchange
[EGA III2, 7.7.5 II and 7.7.10]. Thus H2(f ∗
T I) = 0, as desired.
□
Proposition 5.20. Assume PicX/S exists, and represents Pic(X/S) (fppf). For
s ∈S, assume all the Pic0
Xs/ks are smooth of the same dimension. Then PicX/S
has an open group subscheme Pic0
X/S of ﬁnite type whose ﬁbers are the Pic0
Xs/ks.
Furthermore, if S is reduced, then Pic0
X/S is smooth over S. Moreover, if all the
Pic0
Xs/ks are complete and if PicX/S is separated over S, then Pic0
X/S is closed in
PicX/S and proper over S.
Proof. First oﬀ, PicX/S is locally of ﬁnite type by Proposition 4.17. Now, for
every s ∈S, the schemes PicX/S ⊗ks and PicXs/ks coincide by Exercise 4.4. And
the Pic0
Xs/ks are smooth of the same dimension by hypothesis. So the Pic0
Xs/ks
form an open subscheme Pic0
X/S of PicX/S and the structure map σ: Pic0
X/S →S
is universally open by [EGA IV3, 15.6.3 and 15.6.4]. Furthermore, if S is reduced,
then σ is ﬂat by [EGA IV3, 15.6.7], so smooth by [EGA IV4, 17.5.1].
Deﬁne a map α: Pic0
X/S ×S Pic0
X/S →PicX/S by α(g, h) := gh−1. Then α
factors through the open subscheme Pic0
X/S because forming α commutes with
passing to the ﬁbers. Hence Pic0
X/S is a subgroup
To prove Pic0
X/S is of ﬁnite type, we may work locally on S, and so assume S
is Noetherian. Since PicX/S is locally of ﬁnite type, we need only prove Pic0
X/S is
quasi-compact.
Let V ⊂S be a nonempty aﬃne open subscheme, and U ⊂σ−1V another.
Then σU ⊂S is open since σ is an open map. Set U ′ := σ−1σU. Then U ′ is open,


PDF PAGE 48
48
S. L. KLEIMAN
and α restricts to a map α′ : U ×V U →U ′. In fact, α′ is surjective because its
geometric ﬁbers are surjective by an argument at the end of the proof of Lemma 5.1.
Now, U ×V U so quasi-compact. Hence U ′ is quasi-compact.
Set T := S −σU. By Noetherian induction, we may assume σ−1T is quasi-
compact. Therefore, U ′ ∪σ−1T is quasi-compact. But it is equal to Pic0
X/S. Thus
Pic0
X/S is quasi-compact, as desired.
Moreover, if all the Pic0
Xs/ks are complete and if PicX/S is separated over
S, then Pic0
X/S is proper over S by [EGA IV3, 15.7.11]. Finally, consider the
inclusion map Pic0
X/S ֒→PicX/S. It is proper as Pic0
X/S is proper and PicX/S is
separated; hence, Pic0
X/S is closed.
□
Remark 5.21. Assume the characteristic is 0 and f : X →S is smooth and
proper. Then, in the last two propositions, more can be said, as Vistoli explained to
the author in early May 2004. These additions result from Part (i) of Theorem (5.5)
on p. 123 in Deligne’s article [De68] (which uses Hodge theory on p. 121). Deligne’s
theorem asserts that, under the present conditions, all the sheaves Rqf∗Ωp
X/S are
locally free of ﬁnite rank, and forming them commutes with changing the base.
In Proposition 5.19, PicX/S is smooth over the connected component S0 of s.
Indeed, Deligne’s theorem implies R2f∗OX/S
S0 vanishes since it is locally free,
so of constant rank, and its formation commutes with passage to every ﬁber, in
particular, to that over s ∈S0. Hence, H2(OXt) = 0 for every t ∈S0. Therefore,
Proposition 5.19, as it stands, implies PicX/S is smooth over S0.
In Proposition 5.20, there is no need to assume all the Pic0
Xs/ks are smooth of
the same dimension. Indeed, all the Pic0
Xs/ks are smooth of dimension dim H1(OXs)
by Corollary 5.13. But dim H1(OXs) is constant on each connected component of
S owing to Deligne’s theorem.
Furthermore, if f : X →S is smooth and projective Zariski locally over S,
then Pic0
X/S is smooth whether or not S is reduced. Indeed, we may assume S is
of ﬁnite type over C; the reduction is standard, and sketched by Deligne at the
beginning of his proof of his Theorem (5.5).
By the Inﬁnitesimal Criterion for
Smoothness [SGA 1, p. 67], it suﬃces to show this: given any S-scheme T of the
form T = Spec(A) where A is an Artin local ring that is a ﬁnite C-algebra and
given any closed subscheme R ⊂T , every R-point of Pic0
X/S lifts to a T -point.
But, Pic0
X/S is open in PicX/S by the above argument. Hence it suﬃces to show
every R-point of Pic0
X/S lifts to a T -point of PicX/S.
The residue ﬁeld of A is a ﬁnite extension of C; so the two ﬁelds are equal.
Hence the R-point is deﬁned by an invertible sheaf on XR by Exercise 2.3. So we
want to show every invertible sheaf L on XR lifts to XT . By Serre’s Comparison
Theorem [Ha83, Thm. 2.1, p. 440], it suﬃces to lift L to an analytic invertible
sheaf since fT : XT →T is projective. So pass now to the analytic category.
Let X0 denote the closed ﬁber of XT , and form the exponential sequence:
0 →ZX0 →OX0 →O∗
X0 →0.
Consider the class of LX0 in H1(O∗
X0). It maps to 0 in H2(ZX0) because this group
is discrete and L deﬁnes an R-point of Pic0
X/S.
Form the exponential map OXR →O∗
XR, form its kernel Z, and form the
natural map κ: Z →ZX0. Then κ is bijective. Indeed, let a be a local section of
Z. Then 1 + a + a2/2 + · · · = 1. Set u := 1 + a/2 + · · · . Then au = 0. Suppose a
maps to the local section 0 of OX0. Then a is nilpotent. So u is invertible. Hence


PDF PAGE 49
THE PICARD SCHEME
49
a = 0. Thus κ is injective. But κ is obviously surjective. Thus κ is bijective.
Consider the class λ of L in H1(O∗
XR). It follows that λ maps to 0 in H2(Z).
Hence λ comes from a class γ in H1(OXR). By Deligne’s theorem, γ lifts to a class
γ′ in H1(OXT ). The image of γ′ in H1(O∗
XT ) gives the desired lifting of L to XT .
Example 5.22. The following example complements Proposition 5.20, and was
provided, in early May 2004, by Vistoli. The example shows Pic0
X/S can be smooth
and proper over S and open and closed in PicX/S, although PicX/S isn’t smooth.
In fact, f : X →S is smooth and projective, its geometric ﬁbers are integral, and
S is a smooth curve over an algebraically closed ﬁeld k of arbitrary characteristic.
Furthermore, PicX/S has a component that is a reduced k-point; so it is not smooth
over S, nor even ﬂat.
To construct f : X →S, set P := P3
k and ﬁx d ≥4. Set Q := H0(OP (d))∗
where the ‘∗’ means dual. Set H := P(Q). Then H represents the functor (on
k-schemes T ) whose T -points are the T -ﬂat closed subschemes of PT whose ﬁbers
are surfaces of degree d by Exercise 5.17 and Theorem 3.13. Let W ⊂P × H be
the universal subscheme. Its ideal OP ×H(−W) is equal to the tensor product of
the pullbacks of OP (−d) and OH(−1) by Exercise 3.14. Set N := dim H.
Let G be the Grassmannian of lines in P, and L ⊂P × G the universal line.
Let π: L →G be the projection. Form the exact sequence of locally free sheaves
0 →K →π∗OP ×G(d) →π∗OL(d) →0,
which deﬁnes K; the right-hand map is surjective, since forming it commutes with
passing to the ﬁbers, and on the ﬁbers, it is plainly surjective. Set I := P(K∗).
Then I is smooth, irreducible, and of dimension 4 + N −(d + 1), or N −d + 3.
Note that π∗OP ×G(d) = Q∗
G. So there is a surjection QG →K∗, and it induces
a closed embedding I ⊂G × H. Furthermore, given a T -point of G × H, it lies in
I if and only if LT ⊂WT . Indeed, the latter means the ideal of WT ⊂PT maps to
0 in OLT ; in other words, the composition
OPT (−d) ⊗OH(−1)PT →OPT →OLT
vanishes. Equivalently, the composition
OH(−1)T →gT ∗OPT (d) →gT ∗OLT (d)
vanishes. But the ﬁrst map is equal to the natural map OH(−1)T →Q∗
T . So it
is equivalent that this map factors through KT , or that QT →OH(1)T factors
through K∗
T . Equivalently, the T -point of G × H lies in I. Thus I is the graph of
the incidence correspondence.
Let J ⊂H be the image of I. Note J ̸= H since dim I = dim H −d + 3 and
d ≥4. Consider the open set U ⊂H over which W →H is smooth. Then U ∩J
is nonempty.
Indeed, choose coordinates w, x, y, z for P.
Then U ∩J contains
the point representing the surface {wd −xd = yd −zd} if p ∤d or the surface
{wxd−1 = yd−1} if p | d, because, in either case, the surface is smooth and contains
a line, either {w = x, y = z} or {w = 0, y = 0}.
Let s ∈U ∩J be a simple k-point. Take a line S ⊂H through s and transverse
to J. Replace S by S ∩U. Let X ⊂W be the preimage of S, and f : X →S the
induced map. Then f is smooth and projective, and its geometric ﬁbers are integral.
Hence PicX/S exists, is separated, and represents Pic(X/S) (´et) by Theorem 4.8.
Moreover, H1(OXt) = 0 for each t ∈S; hence, Corollary 5.13 implies PicXt/kt


PDF PAGE 50
50
S. L. KLEIMAN
is reduced and discrete. In particular, Pic0
Xt/kt is smooth, of dimension 0, and
complete. Therefore, Proposition 5.20 implies Pic0
X/S is smooth and proper over
S and open and closed in PicX/S
Since s ∈J, the surface Xs ⊂P contains a line M. And Xs is smooth since
s ∈U; hence M is a divisor. Say OXs(M) deﬁnes the k-point µ ∈PicX/S. View
µ as a reduced closed subscheme. Then µ is a connected component of its ﬁber
PicXs/k because, as just noted, this ﬁber is reduced and discrete. It remains to
prove µ is a connected component of PicX/S.
Suppose not, and let’s ﬁnd a contradiction. Let Q be the connected component
of µ ∈PicX/S. Let kε be the ring of “dual numbers,” and set T := Spec(kε). Then
there is a closed embedding T ֒→PicX/S supported at µ. However, T does not
embed into the ﬁber PicXs/k because the latter is reduced and discrete. Hence the
structure map PicX/S →S embeds T into S.
The embedding T ֒→PicX/S corresponds to an invertible sheaf M on XT by
Exercise 2.3 since k is algebraically closed. Moreover, M|Xs ≃OXs(M) since the
embedding is supported at µ.
Note H1(OXs(M)) = 0. Indeed, by Serre duality [Ha83, Cor. 7.7, p. 244, and
Cor. 7.12, p. 246], it suﬃces to show H1(ωXs(−M)) = 0. Form the sequence
0 →ωXs(−M) →ωXs →ωXs|M →0.
Now, ωXs ≃OXs(d −4) since ωXs ≃ωP ⊗OXs(Xs) by [Ha83, Prp. 8.20, p. 182]
and ωP ≃OP (−4) by [Ha83, Eg. 8.20.1, p. 182]. But H1(OXs(d−4)) = 0 because
Xs ⊂P is a hypersurface, and H0(OXs(d −4)) →H0(OM(d −4)) is surjective
because H0(OP (d −4)) →H0(OM(d −4)) is. Thus H1(OXs(M)) = 0.
Therefore, H0(M)⊗k →H0(OXs(M)) is surjective by the implication (v)⇒(iv)
of Subsection 3.10. So the section of OXs(M) deﬁning M extends to a section of
M. The extension deﬁnes a relative eﬀective divisor on XT , which restricts to M,
owing to the implication (iii)⇒(i) of Lemma 3.4. It follows that the embedding
T ֒→H factors through I, so through J. However, J and S meet transversally
at s; whence, T cannot embed into J ∩S. Here is the desired contradiction. The
discussion is now complete.
Exercise 5.23. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat, its geometric ﬁbers are
integral curves of arithmetic genus pa, and S is Noetherian. Show the “generalized
Jacobians” Pic0
Xs/ks form a smooth quasi-projective family of relative dimension
pa. And show this family is projective if and only if X/S is smooth.
Remark 5.24. Assume X is an Abelian S-scheme of relative dimension g; that
is, X is a smooth and proper S-group scheme with geometrically connected ﬁbers
of dimension g. Then X needn’t be projective Zariski locally over S.
Indeed, according to Raynaud [Ra66, Rem. 8.c, p. 1315], Grothendieck found
two such examples: one where S is reduced and 1-dimensional, and another where
S is the spectrum of the ring of dual numbers of a ﬁeld of characteristic 0. In
[Ra70, Ch. XII], Raynaud gave detailed constructions of similar examples.
Assume X/S is projective, and S is Noetherian. Then Pic0
X/S exists, and is
also a projective Abelian S-scheme of relative dimension g. Set X∗:= Pic0
X/S.
Indeed, PicX/S exists, represents Pic(X/S) (´et), and is locally of ﬁnite type by
the main theorem, Theorem 4.8. For s ∈S, the Pic0
Xs/ks are smooth and proper
of dimension g by [Mm70, § 13].
Hence X∗exists by Proposition 5.20, and is


PDF PAGE 51
THE PICARD SCHEME
51
projective by Exercise 5.7. Finally, X∗is smooth owing to a more sophisticated
version of the proof of Proposition 5.19; see [Mm65, pp. 117–118].
There exists a universal sheaf P on X × PicX/S by Exercise 4.3 since f has a
section g, namely, the identity section. Normalize P by tensoring it with f ∗
X∗g∗
X∗P.
Then its restriction to X × X∗deﬁnes a map, which is a “duality” isomorphism
π: X
∼
−→X∗∗.
Indeed, forming π commutes with changing S, and π’s geometric ﬁbers are isomor-
phisms by [Mm70, Cor., p. 132]. But X and X∗∗are proper over S, and X is ﬂat.
Therefore, π is an isomorphism by [EGA III1, 4.6.7].
Remark 5.25. Assume S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld k, and
X is normal, integral, and projective. Then Pic0
X/k is irreducible and projective by
Proposition 5.3 and Theorem 5.4. Set P := (Pic0
X/k)red and A := Pic0
P/k. Then P
is plainly an Abelian variety; whence, A is an Abelian variety too by Remark 5.24.
Fix a point x ∈X(k). Let B be an Abelian variety, and set B∗:= Pic0
B/k.
Then B∗is an Abelian variety too, and there is a canonical isomorphism B
∼
−→B∗∗
by Remark 5.24. Let ξ : X →X × B∗be the map deﬁned by 0 ∈B∗(k), and let
β : B∗→X × B∗be the map deﬁned by x.
Consider a map a: B∗→P such that a(0) = 0. By the Comparison Theorem,
Theorem 2.5, a corresponds to an invertible sheaf L on X×B∗such that ξ∗L ≃OX.
Normalize L by tensoring it with (β∗L)X. Then L deﬁnes a map b: X →B such
that b(x) = 0.
Reversing the preceding argument, we see that every such b arises from a unique
map a: B∗→PicX/k such that a(0) = 0. Since B∗is integral, a factors through P.
Thus the maps a: B∗→P and b: X →B are in bijective correspondence. Plainly,
this correspondence is compatible with maps b′ : B →B′ such that b′(0) = 0. In
particular, 1P corresponds to a natural map u: X →A such that u(x) = 0, and
every map b: X →B factors uniquely through u.
Remark 5.26. Assume X/S is projective and smooth, its geometric ﬁbers are
connected curves of genus g > 0, and S is Noetherian. Set J := Pic0
X/S; it exists
and is a projective Abelian S-scheme by Exercise 5.23. Set J∗:= Pic0
J/S; it exists,
is a projective Abelian scheme, and is “dual” to J by Remark 5.24.
Suppose X has an invertible sheaf L whose ﬁbers Ls are of degree 1. Deﬁne an
associated “Abel” map
AL : X →J
directly on T -points as follows. Given t: T →X, its graph subscheme Γt ⊂X × T
is a relative eﬀective divisor; see Answer 4.13. Use LT ⊗OXT (−Γ) to deﬁne AL(t).
Then AL induces, via pullback, an “auto-duality” isomorphism
A∗
L : J∗
∼
−→J.
This isomorphism is independent of the choice of L; in fact, it exists even if no
L does.
These facts are proved in [EGK, Thm. 2.1, p. 595].
In fact, a more
general autoduality result is proved: it applies to the natural compactiﬁcation of J,
which parameterizes torsion-free sheaves, when the geometric ﬁbers of X are not
necessarily smooth, but integral with double points at worst. And the proof starts
from scratch, recovering the original case of a single smooth curve over a ﬁeld.


PDF PAGE 52
52
S. L. KLEIMAN
Remark 5.27. Assume X/S is proper and ﬂat. Assume its geometric ﬁbers
are curves, but not necessarily integral. Then there are two remarkable theorems
asserting the existence of PicX/S as an algebraic space and of Pic0
X/S as a separated
S-scheme. These theorems are important in the theory of N´eron models; so in
[BLR, Sect. 9.4], their proofs are sketched, and the original papers, cited.
One theorem is due to Raynaud. He assumes, in addition, that S is the spec-
trum of a discrete valuation ring, that X is normal, and that OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds.
Furthermore, given any geometric ﬁber of X/S, he measures the lengths of the
local rings at the generic points of its irreducible components, and he assumes their
greatest common divisor is 1. Then he proves the above existence assertions.
The other theorem is due to Deligne. Instead, he assumes, in addition, X/S is
semi-stable; that is, its geometric ﬁbers are reduced and connected, and have, at
worst, ordinary double points. Then he proves, in addition, Pic0
X/S is smooth and
quasi-projective; in fact, it carries a canonical S-ample invertible sheaf.
6. The torsion component of the identity
This section establishes the two main ﬁniteness theorem for PicX/S, when X/S
is projective and its geometric ﬁbers are integral. The ﬁrst theorem asserts the
ﬁniteness of the torsion component Picτ
X/S, an open and closed group subscheme.
By deﬁnition, it consists of the points with a multiple in the connected component
Pic0
X/S, which was studied in the previous section.
The second theorem asserts the ﬁniteness of a larger sort of subset Picφ
X/S.
Its points represent the invertible sheaves with a given Hilbert polynomial φ. The
section starts by developing numerical characterizations of Picτ
X/S, or rather of the
corresponding invertible sheaves, when S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed
ﬁeld. This development assumes some familiarity with basic intersection theory,
which is developed in Appendix B.
Definition 6.1. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld. Let L and N be invertible
sheaves on X.
Then L is said to be τ-equivalent to N if, for some nonzero m
depending on L and N, the mth power L⊗m is algebraically equivalent to N ⊗m.
In addition, L is said to be numerically equivalent to N if, for every complete
curve Y ⊂X, the corresponding intersection numbers are equal:
R
c1L · [Y ] =
R
c1N · [Y ].
It is suﬃcient, by additivity, to take Y to be complete and integral. It is then
equivalent that deg LY = deg NY or that deg LY ′ = deg NY ′ where Y ′ is the
normalization of Y , because, in any event,
R
c1L · [Y ] = deg LY = deg LY ′.
Definition 6.2. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld. Let Λ be a family of
invertible sheaves on X. Then Λ is said to be bounded if there exist an S-scheme T
of ﬁnite type and an invertible sheaf M on XT such that, given L ∈Λ, there exists
a geometric point t of T such that Lt ≃Mt.
Theorem 6.3. Assume S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld, and
X is projective. Let L be an invertible sheaf on X. Then the following conditions
are equivalent:
(a) The sheaf L is τ-equivalent to OX.


PDF PAGE 53
THE PICARD SCHEME
53
(b) The sheaf L is numerically equivalent to OX.
(c) The family {L⊗p | p ∈Z} is bounded.
(d) For every coherent sheaf F on X, we have χ(F ⊗L) = χ(F).
(e) For every closed integral curve Y ⊂X, we have χ(LY ) = χ(OY ).
(f) For every integer p, the sheaf L⊗p(1) is ample.
If X is irreducible, then all the conditions above are equivalent to the following one:
(g) For every pair of integers p, n, we have χ(L⊗p(n)) = χ(OX(n)).
If X is irreducible of dimension r ≥2, then all the conditions above are equivalent
to the following one:
(h) Setting ℓ:= c1L and h := c1OX(1), we have
R
ℓhr−1 = 0 and
R
ℓ2hr−2 = 0.
Proof. Let us proceed by establishing the following implications:
(c) =⇒(a) =⇒(d) =⇒(e) ⇐⇒(b) =⇒(c) =⇒(f) =⇒(b);
(d) =⇒(g) =⇒(h) =⇒(b); and (g) =⇒(b) if dim X = 1.
Assume (c). Then, by deﬁnition, there exist an S-scheme T of ﬁnite type and
an invertible sheaf M on XT such that, given p ∈Z, there exists a geometric point
t of T such that L⊗p
t
= Mt. Apply the Pigeonhole Principle: say L⊗p1 and L⊗p2
belong to the same connected component of T , but p1 ̸= p2. Set m := p1 −p2.
Then L⊗m is algebraically equivalent to OX. Thus (a) holds.
Furthermore, for each t ∈T , there exists an n such that Mt(n) is ample by
[EGA II, 4.5.8]. So t has a neighborhood U such that Mu(n) is ample for every
u ∈U by [EGA III1, 4.7.1]. Since T is quasi-compact, T is covered by ﬁnitely
many of the U. Let N be the product of the corresponding n. Then Mt(N) is ample
for every t ∈T . In particular, L⊗p(N) is ample for every p ∈Z. So
 L⊗q(1)
⊗N is
ample for every q ∈Z. Thus (f) holds.
Assume (a). The function n 7→χ(F ⊗L⊗n) is a polynomial. To prove it is
constant, we may replace L by L⊗m for any nonzero m. Thus we may assume
L is algebraically equivalent to OX. So let T be a connected S-scheme, and M
an invertible sheaf on XT .
Then for a ﬁxed n, as t ∈T varies, the function
t 7→χ(F ⊗L⊗n
t
) is constant by [EGA III2, 7.9.5]. It follows that (d) holds.
Assume (d).
Taking F := OY , we get (e).
Taking F := L⊗p(n), we get
χ(L⊗(p+1)(n)) = χ(L⊗p(n)). Thus whether or not X is irreducible, (g) holds,.
Assume (g).
Then X is irreducible, say of dimension r.
Set ℓ:= c1L and
h := c1OX(1). Write
χ(L⊗p(n)) =
X
0≤i, j≤r
aij
p + i
i
n + j
j

where aij =
R
ℓihj if i + j = r. Then (g) implies aij = 0 if i ≥1. If r ≥2, then (h)
follows. Suppose r = 1. Then
R
ℓ= 0. Now, Xred is the only closed integral curve
contained in X, and
R
ℓis a multiple of
R
ℓ· [Xred]. Thus (b) holds.
Conditions (e) and (b) are equivalent since χ(LY ) = deg(LY ) + χ(OY ) by
Riemann’s Theorem.
Assume (f). Then for every closed integral curve Y ⊂X, we have
0 ≤deg(L⊗p
Y (1)) = p deg(LY ) + deg(OY (1))
for every integer p. So deg(LY ) = 0. Thus (b) holds.
Assume (h). Then X is irreducible of dimension r ≥2. To prove (b), plainly


PDF PAGE 54
54
S. L. KLEIMAN
we may replace X by its reduction. We proceed by induction on r. If r = 2, then
(b) holds by the Hodge Index Theorem.
Suppose r ≥3. Given a complete integral curve Y ⊂X, take n so that the
twisted ideal IY,X(n −1) is generated by its global sections. View these sections as
sections of OX(n −1). Then they deﬁne a linear system that is free of base points
on X −Y . So the global sections of IY (n) deﬁne a linear system that is very ample
on X −Y . In particular, this system maps X −Y onto a variety of dimension at
least 2; in other words, the system is not “composite with a pencil.”
Hence the generic member Hη is geometrically irreducible by [Za58, Thm. I.6.3,
p. 30]. In the ﬁrst instance, we must apply the cited theorem to the induced system
on the normalization of X, and we conclude that the preimage of Hη is geometrically
irreducible. But then Hη is too. Therefore, by [EGA IV3, 9.7.7], a general member
H is irreducible.
Set ℓ1 := c1LH and h1 := c1OH(1). Then, by the Projection Formula,
R
ℓ1hr−2
1
= n
R
ℓhr−1 = 0 and
R
ℓ2
1hr−3
1
= n
R
ℓ2hr−2 = 0.
So by induction, LH is numerically equivalent to OX on H. But Y ⊂H since H
arises from a section of IY (n). Hence, by the Projection Formula,
R
ℓ· [Y ] =
R
ℓ1 · [Y ] = 0.
Thus (b) holds.
Finally, assume (b). By Lemma 6.6 below, there is an m such that, if N is an
invertible sheaf on X numerically equivalent to OX, then N is m-regular. So N(m)
is generated by its global sections, and its higher cohomology groups vanish.
Set φ(n) := χ(OX(n)) and M := φ(m).
Then dim H0(N(m)) = M, since
χ(N(n)) = φ(n) also by Lemma 6.6 below. Set F := OX(−m)⊕M. Then N is a
quotient of F.
Set T := Quotφ
F/X/k.
Then T is of ﬁnite type.
Let M be the universal
quotient. Then there exists a k-point t ∈T such that N = Mt. Let U ⊂X × T be
the open set on which M is invertible. Let R ⊂T be the image of the complement
of U. Then R is closed. Replace T by T −R, and M by its restriction. Then
t ∈T still. Thus the invertible sheaves on X numerically equivalent to OX form a
bounded family. In particular, (c) holds.
□
Exercise 6.4. Consider the preceding paragraph, the last one in the proof of
Theorem 6.3. Using DivX/k instead of Quotφ
F/X/k, give another proof that the
invertible sheaves N on X numerically equivalent to OX form a bounded family.
Lemma 6.5. Assume S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld, and X is
projective of dimension r. Let F be a coherent sheaf on X. Then there is a number
BF such that, if L is any invertible sheaf on X numerically equivalent to OX, then
dim H0(L ⊗F(n)) ≤BF
 n+r
r

for all n ≥0.
Proof. Suppose r = 0. Then L⊗F(n) = F. So we may take BF = dim H0(F).
Suppose r ≥1. Given a short exact sequence 0 →F′ →F →F′′ →0, we have
dim H0(L ⊗F(n)) ≤dim H0(L ⊗F′(n)) + dim H0(L ⊗F′′(n)).
So given BF ′ and BF ′′, we can take BF := BF ′ + BF ′′.
Say X = Proj(A) and F = f
M where M is a ﬁnitely generated graded A-module.


PDF PAGE 55
THE PICARD SCHEME
55
Then there is a ﬁltration by graded submodules
M =: Mq ⊃Mq−1 ⊃· · · ⊃M1 ⊃M0 := 0
such that Mi+1/Mi ≃(A/Pi)[pi] where Pi is a homogeneous prime for each i. It
follows that we may assume X is integral and F = OX(p).
Let L be numerically equivalent to OX.
Set ℓ:= c1L and h := c1OX(1).
Suppose L(p) has a nonzero section. It deﬁnes a divisor D, possibly 0. Hence
0 ≤R hr−1[D] = R hr−1ℓ+ p R hr.
But
R
hr−1ℓ= 0 because hr−1 is represented by a curve since r ≥1. And
R
hr > 0.
Hence p ≥0. Thus H0(L(−1)) = 0.
Let H be a hyperplane section of X. Then there is an exact sequence
0 →L(n −1) →L(n) →LH(n) →0.
By induction on r, we may assume there is a number B such that
dim H0(LH(n)) ≤B
 n+r−1
r−1

for all n ≥0;
moreover, B works for every L. Hence
dim H0(L(n)) −dim H0(L(n −1)) ≤B
 n+r−1
r−1

for all n ≥0.
But H0(L(−1)) = 0. Since
 n+r−1
r

+
 n+r−1
r−1

=
 n+r
r

, induction on n yields
dim H0(L(n)) ≤B
 n+r
r

for all n ≥0.
Recall F = OX(p). If p ≤0, then F ⊂OX; so we may take BF := B. But
if p ≥0, then
 p+n+r
r

≤
 p+r
r
 n+r
r

since every monomial of degree p + n is the
product of one of degree p and one of degree n; so we may take BF := B
 p+r
r

.
□
Lemma 6.6. Assume S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld, and X
is projective. Then there is an integer m such that, if L is any invertible sheaf on
X numerically equivalent to OX, then L is m-regular, and
χ(L(n)) = χ(OX(n)) for all n.
Proof. Set r := dim(X), and proceed by induction on r. If r = 0, then both
assertions are trivial. So assume r ≥1.
First, let us establish the asserted equation. Given an L, ﬁx q ≥1 such that
L(q) is very ample. Take eﬀective divisors F and G such that
OX(F) = OX(q) and OX(G) = L(q).
For every p, plainly L⊗p
F
and L⊗p
G
are numerically equivalent to OF and OG.
Form 0 →OX(−F) →OX →OF →0 and 0 →OX(−G) →OX →OG →0.
Tensor them with L⊗p(n + q). We get
0 →L⊗p(n) →L⊗p(n + q) →L⊗p
F (n + q) →0,
(6.6.1)
0 →L⊗p−1(n) →L⊗p(n + q) →L⊗p
G (n + q) →0.
Apply χ(•) and subtract. We get
χ(L⊗p(n)) −χ(L⊗p−1)(n)) = χ(L⊗p
G (n + q)) −χ(L⊗p
F (n + q)).
By induction, the right hand side varies as a polynomial in n, which is independent
of p. Hence there are polynomials φ1(n) and φ0(n) such that
χ(L⊗p(n)) = φ1(n)p + φ0(n).
(6.6.2)


PDF PAGE 56
56
S. L. KLEIMAN
Suppose φ1 ̸= 0. Say φ1(n) ̸= 0 for all n ≥n1.
By induction, there is an integer n2 such that L⊗p
F
is n2-regular for every p.
So Hi(L⊗p
F (n)) = 0 for i ≥1, for n ≥n2 −i, and for every p. Hence, owing to
Sequence (6.6.1), there is an isomorphism
Hi(L⊗p(n))
∼
−→Hi(L⊗p(n + q)) for i ≥2, for n ≥n2, and for every p.
Now, for each i ≥2, each p, and each n, there is a j ≥0 such that
Hi(L⊗p(n + jq)) = 0
by Serre’s Theorem. Therefore,
Hi(L⊗p(n)) = 0 for i ≥2, for n ≥n2 and for every p.
Hence H0(L⊗p(n)) ≥χ(L⊗p(n)) for n ≥n2 and every p. Take n := max(n2, n1).
Owing to Equation (6.6.2), then H0(L⊗p(n)) →∞as p →∞if φ1(n) > 0 or as
p →−∞if φ1(n) < 0.
However, by Lemma (6.5), there is a number B such
that H0(L⊗p(n)) ≤B for any p. This contradiction means φ1 = 0. Hence Equa-
tion (6.6.2) yields χ(L(n)) = χ(OX(n)) for all n, as desired.
Finally, in order to prove there is an m such that every L numerically equivalent
to OX is m-regular, we must modify Mumford’s original work [Mm66, Lect. 14]
because these L are not ideals. However, as Mumford himself points out [Mm66,
pp. 102–103], the hypothesis that his sheaf I is an ideal enters only through the
bound dim H0(I(n)) ≤
 n+r
r

. Plainly, this bound can be replaced by the bound
BF with F := OX of Lemma 6.5. Of course, in addition, we must use the fact we
just proved, that all the L have the same Hilbert polynomial.
□
Exercise 6.7. Assume S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld, and
X is projective and integral of dimension r ≥1. Set h := c1OX(1). Let L be an
invertible sheaf on X, and set ℓ:= c1L. Say
χ(L(n)) = P
0≤i≤r ai
 n+i
i

and a :=
R
ℓhr−1.
Suppose a < ar. Show dim H0(L(n)) ≤ar
 n+r
r

for all n ≥0. Furthermore,
modifying Mumford’s work [Mm66, pp. 102–103] slightly, show there is a polyno-
mial Φr depending only on r such that L is m-regular with m := Φr(a0, . . . , ar−1).
In general, show there is a polynomial Ψr depending only on r such that L is
m-regular with m := Ψr(a0, . . . , ar; a).
Definition 6.8. Let G/S be a group scheme. For n > 0, let ϕn : G →G
denote the nth power map. Then Gτ is the set deﬁned by the formula
Gτ := S
n>0 ϕ−1
n G0
where G0 is the union of the connected components of the identity G0
s for s ∈S.
Lemma 6.9. Let k be a ﬁeld, and G a commutative group scheme locally of
ﬁnite type. Then Gτ is an open group subscheme, and forming it commutes with
extending k. Moreover, if Gτ is quasi-compact, then it is closed and of ﬁnite type.
Proof. By Lemma 5.1, G0 is an open and closed group subscheme of ﬁnite
type, and forming it commutes with extending k. Now, the nth power map ϕn is
continuous, and forming it commutes with extending k; also, ϕn is a homomorphism
since G is commutative. So Gτ is the ﬁltered union of the open and closed group
subschemes ϕ−1
n G0, and forming them commutes with extending k. Hence Gτ is


PDF PAGE 57
THE PICARD SCHEME
57
an open group subscheme, and forming it commutes with extending k. Moreover,
if Gτ is quasi-compact, then Gτ is the union of ﬁnitely many of the ϕ−1
n G0, and so
Gτ is closed; also, then Gτ is of ﬁnite type since G is locally of ﬁnite type.
□
Exercise 6.10. Let k be a ﬁeld, and G a commutative group scheme locally of
ﬁnite type. Let H ⊂G be a group subscheme of ﬁnite type. Show H ⊂Gτ. (Thus,
if Gτ is of ﬁnite type, then it is the largest group subscheme of ﬁnite type.)
Exercise 6.11. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume PicX/k exists
and represents Pic(X/k) (fppf). Let L be an invertible sheaf on X, and λ ∈PicX/k
the corresponding point. Show L is τ-equivalent to OX if and only if λ ∈Picτ
X/k.
Proposition 6.12. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k. Assume PicX/k
exists and represents Pic(X/k) (fppf). Then Picτ
X/k is an open group subscheme, and
forming it commutes with extending k. Moreover, if X is projective, then Picτ
X/k
is closed and of ﬁnite type.
Proof. By Proposition 4.17, PicX/S is locally of ﬁnite type.
So owing to
Lemma 6.9, we need only prove Picτ
X/k is quasi-compact when X is projective.
Since forming Picτ
X/k commutes with extending k, we may also assume k is alge-
braically closed.
At the very end of the proof of Theorem 6.3, we proved that the invertible
sheaves L numerically equivalent to OX form a bounded family. In other words,
there is a k-scheme T of ﬁnite type and an invertible sheaf M on XT such that the
L appear among the ﬁbers Mt.
Then M deﬁnes a map θ: T →PicX/k. Owing to Theorem 6.3 and to Exer-
cise 6.11, we have θ(T ) ⊃Picτ
X/k. Since T is Noetherian, so is θ(T ); whence, so is
any subspace of θ(T ). Thus Picτ
X/k is quasi-compact, as needed.
□
Exercise 6.13. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld k.
Assume X is pro-
jective and geometrically integral. Show Picτ
X/k is quasi-projective. If also X is
geometrically normal, show Picτ
X/k is projective.
Remark 6.14. In Proposition 6.12, if X is projective, then PicX/k does exist
and represent Pic(X/k) (fppf) according to Corollary 4.18.3. In fact, this corollary
asserts PicX/k exists and represents Pic(X/k) (fppf) whenever X is complete; X need
not be projective.
Furthermore, although we used projective methods to prove
Proposition 6.12, we can infer it whenever X is complete, as follows.
Assume X is complete. By Chow’s lemma, there is a projective variety X′ and
a surjective map γ : X′ →X. By Theorem 4.18.5, the induced map
γ∗: PicX/k →PicX′/k
is of ﬁnite type. Set H := (γ∗)−1 Picτ
X′/k. Then H is of ﬁnite type since Picτ
X′/k
is by Proposition 6.12. Now, plainly γ∗Pic0
X/k ⊂Pic0
X′/k. So since γ∗is a homo-
morphism, γ∗Picτ
X/k ⊂Picτ
X′/k; whence, Picτ
X/k ⊂H (in fact, the two are equal
by Exercise 6.10). Since Picτ
X/k is open, it is therefore a subscheme of ﬁnite type.
Similarly, in Theorem 6.3, Conditions (a)–(e) continue to make sense and to
remain equivalent whenever X is complete. Indeed, our proofs of the implications
(c) =⇒(a) =⇒(d) =⇒(e) ⇐⇒(b) and (c) =⇒(f) =⇒(b)
work without change. However, we used projective methods to prove (b) =⇒(c).
Nevertheless, we can infer this implication whenever X is complete, as follows.


PDF PAGE 58
58
S. L. KLEIMAN
Let L be numerically equivalent to OX. Let γ : X′ →X be as above. Then
γ∗L is numerically equivalent to OX′. Indeed, Let Y ′ ⊂X′ be a closed curve. Then
R
c1γ∗L · [Y ′] is a multiple of
R
c1L · [γY ′] by the Projection Formula; hence, the
former number vanishes as the latter does.
Let λ ∈PicX/k represent L. Then γ∗λ ∈PicX′/k represents γ∗L. Now, γ∗L
is numerically equivalent to OX′. Hence γ∗λ ∈Picτ
X′/k owing to Theorem 6.3 and
to Exercise 6.11. So λ ∈H := (γ∗)−1 Picτ
X′/k.
The inclusion H ֒→PicX/k is deﬁned by an invertible sheaf M on XT for some
fppf covering T →H. (Although k is algebraically closed, possibly OS
∼
−→f∗OX
does not hold universally, so we cannot simply take T := H.) Replace T by an
open subscheme so that T →H is of ﬁnite type and surjective. Since H is of ﬁnite
type, so is T .
Let t ∈T be a k-point that maps to λ ∈H. Then Mt ≃L. Now, for every
p ∈Z, plainly L⊗p is numerically equivalent to OX. So similarly L⊗p ≃Mtp for
some k-point tp ∈T . Thus (c) holds.
Exercise 6.15. Assume PicX/S exists and represents Pic(X/S) (fppf). Let Λ
be an arbitrary subset of PicX/S, and L the corresponding family of classes of
invertible sheaves on the ﬁbers of X/S in the sense of Exercise 4.5. Show Λ is quasi-
compact (with the induced topology) if and only if L is bounded in the following
sense: there exist an S-scheme T of ﬁnite type and an invertible sheaf M on XT
such that every class in L is represented by a ﬁber Mt for some t ∈T .
Theorem 6.16. Assume f : X →S is projective Zariski locally over S, and ﬂat
with integral geometric ﬁbers. Then Picτ
X/S is an open and closed group subscheme
of ﬁnite type, and forming it commutes with changing S. If also X/S is projective,
and S is Noetherian, then Picτ
X/S is quasi-projective.
Proof. The second assertion follows from the ﬁrst and Exercise 4.11. The
ﬁrst assertion is local on S; so, to prove it, we may assume X/S is projective.
Theorem 4.8 asserts PicX/S exists and is locally of ﬁnite type. So the Picτ
Xs/ks
are subgroups of the PicXs/ks, and forming Picτ
Xs/ks commutes with extending ks
by Exercise 4.4 and Lemma 6.9. However, plainly Picτ
X/S = S
s∈S Picτ
Xs/ks as
sets. Hence, forming Picτ
X/S commutes with changing S; moreover, in order to
infer Picτ
X/S is a group subscheme, we need only prove it is open.
Plainly, a subset A of a topological space B is open or closed if (and only if),
for every member Bi of an open covering of B, the intersection A ∩Bi is so in
Bi. Hence, in order to infer Picτ
X/S is an open and closed group subscheme, we
need only prove that, for any aﬃne open subscheme U of PicX/k, the intersection
U ∩Picτ
X/S is open and closed in U.
Theorem 4.8 also asserts PicX/k represents Pic(X/S) (´et). Thus the inclusion
U ֒→PicX/S is deﬁned by an invertible sheaf M on XT for some ´etale covering
T →U. Replace T by an open subscheme so that T →U is of ﬁnite type and
surjective. Let T τ be the set of t ∈T where Mt is τ-equivalent to OXt. Then T τ
is the preimage of Picτ
X/S in T owing to Exercise 6.11. So we have to prove T τ is
open and closed.
Since U is aﬃne, it is quasi-compact, so of ﬁnite type. Hence T is of ﬁnite type.
So it has only ﬁnitely many connected components. But, for every pair p, n, the
function t 7→χ(M⊗p
t (n)) is constant on each connected component of T . Therefore,
Theorem 6.3 implies T τ is open and closed, as desired.


PDF PAGE 59
THE PICARD SCHEME
59
It remains to prove Picτ
X/S is of ﬁnite type. Let L be the corresponding family
of classes of invertible sheaves on the ﬁbers of X/S. By Exercise 6.15, we need
only prove L is bounded. At the very end of the proof of Theorem 6.3, we proved
essentially this statement when S is the spectrum of an algebraically closed ﬁeld,
and X is projective, but not necessarily integral. We can argue similarly here, but
must make two important modiﬁcations.
First, if a class in L is represented by an invertible sheaf L on a ﬁber Xk where
k is a ﬁeld containing the ﬁeld ks of a point s ∈S, then χ(L(n)) = χ(OXs(n)) for
all n, owing to Lemma 6.6. But χ(OXs(n)) can vary with s. Nevertheless, it must
remain the same on each connected component of S. And the matter in question
is local on S. So we may and must assume S is connected.
Second, at the end of the proof of Lemma 6.6, when we modiﬁed Mumford’s
work, we used the bound BF with F := OX of Lemma 6.5; in fact, in the induction
step, we implicitly used the corresponding bounds for various subschemes of X.
Unfortunately, it is not clear, in general, how these bounds vary with X. But in
place of Lemma 6.6, we can use Exercise 6.7, which provides a uniform m such that
L is m-regular for every L representing a class in L.
□
Corollary 6.17. Assume S is Noetherian. Assume f : X →S is projective
Zariski locally over S, and is ﬂat with geometrically integral ﬁbers. For each s ∈S,
let k′
s be the algebraic closure of the residue ﬁeld ks. Then the torsion group
Picτ
Xk′s /k′s(k′
s)

Pic0
Xk′s /k′s(k′
s)
(6.17.1)
is ﬁnite, and its order is bounded.
Proof. Since Pic0
Xk′s /k′s is open in Picτ
Xk′s /k′s by Proposition 5.3, the order of
their quotient is equal to the number of connected components of Picτ
Xk′s /k′
s. This
number is ﬁnite because Picτ
Xk′s /k′s is of ﬁnite type by Proposition 6.12.
Moreover, Picτ
Xk′s /k′s is equal to Picτ
Xs/ks ⊗k′
s again by Proposition 6.12, so
equal to Picτ
X/S ⊗k′
s essentially by Deﬁnition 6.8. But, since Picτ
X/S is of ﬁnite
type by Theorem 6.16, the number of connected components of Picτ
X/S ⊗k′
s is
constant for s in a nonempty open subset of S by [EGA IV3, 9.7.9]. Hence the
number is bounded by Noetherian induction.
□
Exercise 6.18. Assume X/S is projective and smooth, its geometric ﬁbers are
irreducible, and S is Noetherian. Show that Picτ
X/S is projective.
Remark 6.19. Assume X/S is proper.
If PicX/S exists and it represents
Pic(X/k) (fppf), then Picτ
X/S is an open group subscheme of ﬁnite type. This fact
can be derived from Theorem 6.16 through a series of reduction steps; see [Kl71,
Thm. 4.7, p. 647].
Assume S is Noetherian in addition. Then, whether or not PicX/k exists, the
torsion group (6.17.1) is ﬁnite and its order is bounded. This fact follows from
the preceding one via the proof of Corollary 6.17, since there is an nonempty open
subscheme V of Sred such that PicXV /V exists and represents Pic(XV /V ) (fppf) by
Grothendieck’s Theorem 4.18.2.
Furthermore, the rank of the corresponding “N´eron–Severi” group
PicXk′s /k′s(k′
s)

Picτ
Xk′s /k′
s(k′
s)


PDF PAGE 60
60
S. L. KLEIMAN
is ﬁnite and bounded. This fact is far deeper; see [Kl71, Thm. 5.1, p. 650, and
Rem. 5.3, p. 652], and see [Za35, pp. 121–124]. Moreover, the rank is arithmetic in
nature: its value need not be a constructible function of s ∈S; a standard example
is discussed in [BLR, p. 235].
Theorem 6.20. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat with integral geometric
ﬁbers. Given a polynomial φ ∈Q[n], let Picφ
X/S ⊂PicX/S be the set of points
representing invertible sheaves L such that χ(L(n)) = φ(n) for all n. Then the
Picφ
X/S are open and closed subschemes of ﬁnite type; they are disjoint and cover;
and forming them commutes with changing S. If also S is Noetherian, then Picφ
X/S
is quasi-projective.
Proof. Plainly, the Picφ
X/S are disjoint and cover, and forming them com-
mutes with changing S. The rest of the proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 6.16.
In fact, the present case is simpler because the sheaves in question have the same
Hilbert polynomials by hypothesis; there is no need to appeal to Theorem 6.3 nor
to Lemma 6.6.
□
Exercise 6.21. Assume X/S is locally projective over S and ﬂat, and its
geometric ﬁbers are integral curves. Given an integer m, let Picm
X/S ⊂PicX/S be
the set of points representing invertible sheaves L of degree m.
Show the Picm
X/S are open and closed subschemes of ﬁnite type; show they are
disjoint and cover; and show that forming them commutes with changing S.
Show there is no abuse of notation: the ﬁber of Pic0
X/S over s ∈S is the
connected component of 0 ∈PicXs/ks. Show there is no torsion: Pic0
X/S = Picτ
X/S.
Show each Picm
X/S is an fppf-torsor under Pic0
X/S; that is, the latter acts naturally
on the former, and the two become isomorphic after base change by an fppf-covering.
Show the Picm
X/S are quasi-projective if X/S is projective and S is Noetherian.
Remark 6.22. There is another important case where Pic0
X/S = Picτ
X/S,
namely, when X is an Abelian S-scheme. Indeed, the equation holds if it does
on each geometric ﬁber of X/S; so we may assume that S is the spectrum of an
algebraically closed ﬁeld.
In this case, a modern proof was given by Mumford
[Mm70, Cor.2, p. 178].
Example 6.23. Theorem 6.20 can fail if a geometric ﬁber of X/S is reducible.
For example, let S be the spectrum of a ﬁeld k, and let X be the union of two
disjoint lines. For each pair a, b ∈Z, let La,b be the invertible sheaf that restricts
to O(a) on the ﬁrst line and to O(b) on the second.
By Riemann’s Theorem, χ(La,b(n)) = (a + b) + 2n + 1. And it is easy to see
that PicX/k is the disjoint union of copies of Spec(k) indexed by Z × Z; compare
with Exercise 4.15. Moreover, La,b is represented by the point with index (a, b).
Hence, each set Picφ
X/k is inﬁnite, and so not of ﬁnite type.
Remark 6.24. Theorem 6.20 can be modiﬁed as follows. Assume S is Noether-
ian. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat with integral geometric ﬁbers of dimension
r.
Then a subset Λ ⊂PicX/S is of ﬁnite type if, in the Hilbert polynomials
Pr
i=0 ai
 n+i
i

of the corresponding invertible sheaves, ar−1 remains bounded from
above and below, and ar−2 remains bounded from below alone. Moreover, Λ is of ﬁ-
nite type if, instead,
R
ℓhr−1 remains bounded from above and below, and
R
ℓ2hr−2
remains bounded from below alone, where ℓand h are as usual.


PDF PAGE 61
THE PICARD SCHEME
61
These facts can be derived from Theorem 6.20 by reducing to the case where
the ﬁbers are normal and by showing, in this case using simple elementary means,
that the given bounds imply bounds on all the ai; see [Kl71, Thm. 3.13, p. 641].
The ﬁrst fact is essentially equivalent, given Theorems 6.20 and 4.18.5, to the
following fact. Assume S is Noetherian, and X/S is projective and ﬂat with ﬁbers
whose irreducible components have dimension at least 3. Let Y be a relative ef-
fective divisor whose associated sheaf is OX(1). Then the induced map of Picard
functors is representable by maps of ﬁnite type. See [Kl71, Thm. 3.8, p. 636].
The latter fact was ﬁrst proved directly using the “equivalence criterion” men-
tioned in Remark 5.8 by Grothendieck [FGA, p. C-10].
Corollary 6.25. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat with integral geometric
ﬁbers. Then the connected components of PicX/S are open and closed subschemes
of ﬁnite type.
Proof. By construction, PicX/S is locally Noetherian. Hence, its connected
components are open and closed; see the proof of Lemma 5.1. Now, a connected
component is always contained in any open and closed set it meets. Hence the
connected components of PicX/S are of ﬁnite type owing to Theorem 6.20.
□
Remark 6.26. In Corollary 6.25, X/S must be projective, not simply proper,
nor even projective Zariski locally over S. Indeed, Grothendieck [FGA, Rem. 3.3,
p. 232-07] gave an example where PicX/S has a connected component that is not
of ﬁnite type: here S is a curve with two components that meet in two points, such
as the union of a smooth conic and a line in the plane over an algebraically closed
ﬁeld, and X is projective over a neighborhood of each component of S.
Corollary 6.27. Assume X/S is projective and ﬂat with integral geometric
ﬁbers. For n ̸= 0, the nth power map ϕn : PicX/S →PicX/S is of ﬁnite type.
Proof. Owing to Corollary 6.25, we need only prove that, given any connected
component U of PicX/S, the preimage ϕ−1
n U is of ﬁnite type too. Since PicX/k
represents Pic(X/S) (´et) by Theorem 4.8, the inclusion U ֒→PicX/S is deﬁned by an
invertible sheaf M on XT for some ´etale covering T →U.
Fix t ∈T , and set ψ(p, q) := χ(Mp
t (q)). Fix p, q, and form the set T ′ of points
t′ of T such that χ(Mp
t′(q)) = ψ(p, q). By [EGA III2, 7.9.4], the set T ′ is open,
and so is its complement. Hence their images are open in U, and plainly these
images are disjoint. But U is connected. Hence T ′ = T .
Let λ ∈ϕ−1
n U. Represent λ by an invertible sheaf L. Set θ(m, q) := χ(Lm(q)).
Say θ(m, q) = P ai(m)
 q+i
i

where ai(m) is a polynomial. Now, ϕn(λ) ∈U. So
θ(mn, q) = ψ(m, q). So ai(mn) is independent of the choice of λ for all m. Hence
ai(m) is too. Set φ(n) := θ(1, q). Then ϕ−1
n U ⊂Picφ
X/S. Hence Theorem 6.20
implies ϕ−1
n U is of ﬁnite type.
□
Remark 6.28. Corollary 6.27 holds in greater generality.
Assume X/S is
proper, and assume PicX/S exists and represents Pic(X/k) (fppf). Then, for n ̸= 0,
the nth power map ϕn : PicX/S →PicX/S is of ﬁnite type.
This fact can be
derived from the corollary through a series of reduction steps similar to those used
to generalize Theorem 6.16; see [Kl71, Thm. 3.6, p. 635].
Exercise 6.29. Assume S is Noetherian, and X/S is projective and ﬂat. As-
sume PicX/S exists and represents Pic(X/S) (fppf). Let Λ be an arbitrary subset of


PDF PAGE 62
62
S. L. KLEIMAN
PicX/S, and Π the corresponding set of Hilbert polynomials. Show Π is ﬁnite if Λ
is quasi-compact. Show Π has only one element if Λ is connected.
Appendix A. Answers to all the exercises
The exercises are not meant to be tricky, but are designed to help you check,
solidify, and expand your understanding of the ideas and methods. So to promote
your own mathematical health, try seriously to do each exercise before you read its
answer here. Note that the answer key is the same number as the exercise key.
Answer 2.3. Since A is local, Pic(T ) is trivial; so Deﬁnitions 2.1 and 2.2 yield
the ﬁrst isomorphism, PicX(A)
∼
−→PicX/S(A).
Let L be an invertible sheaf on XA. Suppose the isomorphism class of L maps to
0 in Pic(X/S) (zar)(A). Then there is a Zariski covering T ′ →T and an isomorphism
v′ : LT ′
∼
−→OXT ′ . Now, T ′ is a disjoint union of Zariski open subschemes of T .
One of them contains the closed point, so is equal to T . Restricting v′ yields an
isomorphism L
∼
−→OXA. Thus PicX(A) →Pic(X/S) (zar)(A) is injective.
Given λ ∈Pic(X/S) (zar)(A), represent λ by an invertible sheaf L′ on XT ′ for
a suitable Zariski covering T ′ →T . Again, T ′ contains a copy of T as an open
and closed subscheme. Restricting L′ yields an invertible sheaf L on XA. Since L′
represent λ, there is an isomorphism v′′ between the two pullbacks of L′ to T ′×T T ′.
Restricting v′′ to T ′ ×T T , or T ′, yields an isomorphism between L′ and LT ′. Hence
L too represents λ. Thus PicX(A) →Pic(X/S) (zar)(A) is surjective too.
Assume A is Artin local with algebraically closed residue ﬁeld. Then every
´etale A-algebra B of ﬁnite type is a direct product of Artin local algebras, each
isomorphic to A, owing to [EGA IV4, 17.6.2 and 17.6.3]. So if T ′ →T is any ´etale
covering, then T ′ is a disjoint union of open subschemes, each a copy of T . Hence,
reasoning as above, we conclude PicX(A)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (´et)(A).
Assume A = k where k is an algebraically closed ﬁeld. Then any fppf covering
T ′ →T has a section; indeed, at any closed point of T ′, the local ring is essentially of
ﬁnite type over k, and so the residue ﬁeld is equal to k by the Hilbert Nullstellensatz.
This point is not necessarily isolated in T ′; nevertheless, reasoning essentially as
above, we conclude PicX(k)
∼
−→Pic(X/S) (fppf)(k).
□
Answer 2.4. The extension C/R is ´etale. So if the two pullbacks of ϕ∗O(1)
to XC⊗RC are isomorphic, then ϕ∗O(1) deﬁnes an element λ in Pic(X/R) (´et)(R).
Take an indeterminate z, and identify C with R[z]/(z2+1). Then, by extension
of scalars, C ⊗R C becomes identiﬁed with C[z]/(z −1)(z + 1). So, by the Chinese
Remainder Theorem, C⊗RC is isomorphic to the product C×C. (Correspondingly,
c ⊗1 and 1 ⊗c are identiﬁed with (c, c) and (c, c) where c is the conjugate of c, but
this fact is not needed here.)
Thus XC⊗RC is isomorphic, over R, to the disjoint union of two copies of XC.
Now, for any ﬁeld k, an invertible sheaf L on P1
k is determined, up to isomorphism,
by a single integer its Euler characteristic χ(L) by [Ha83, Cor. 6.17, p. 145]. Hence,
the two pullbacks of ϕ∗O(1) to XC⊗RC are isomorphic. Thus ϕ∗O(1) deﬁnes a λ in
Pic(X/R) (´et)(R).
(Similarly, the isomorphism class of ϕ∗O(1) on XC is independent of the choice
of the isomorphism ϕ: XC
∼
−→P1
C. So λ is independent too. But this fact too is
not needed here.)
Finally, we must show λ is not in the image of Pic(X/R) (zar)(R). By way of


PDF PAGE 63
THE PICARD SCHEME
63
contradiction, suppose λ is. Then λ arises from an invertible sheaf L on X. A
priori, the pullback L|XC need not be isomorphic to ϕ∗O(1). Rather, these two
invertible sheaves need only become isomorphic after they are pulled back to XA
where A is some ´etale C-algebra.
However, cohomology commutes with ﬂat base change. So
dimR H0(L) = rankA H0(L|XA) = dimC H0(ϕ∗O(1)) = 2.
Hence, L has a nonzero section. It deﬁnes an exact sequence
0 →OX →L →OD →0.
Similarly H1(OX) = 0. Hence dimR H0(OD) = 1. Therefore, D is an R-point of X.
But X has no R-point. Thus λ is not in the image of Pic(X/R) (zar)(R).
□
Answer 2.6. First of all, we have Pic(X/S) (fppf)(k) = Pic(Xk/k) (fppf)(k) essen-
tially by deﬁnition, because a map T ′ →T of k-schemes is an fppf-covering if and
only if it is an fppf-covering when viewed as a map of S-schemes. And a similar
analysis applies to the other three functors. Now, fk : Xk →k has a section; indeed,
fk is of ﬁnite type and k is algebraically closed, and so any closed point of X has
residue ﬁeld k by the Hilbert Nullstellensatz. Hence, by Part 2 of Theorem 2.5, the
k-points of all four functors are the same. Finally, PicX/S(k) = Pic(Xk) because
Pic(T ) is trivial whenever T has only one closed point.
Whether or not OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally, all four functors have the same
geometric points by Exercise 2.3; in fact, given an algebraically closed ﬁeld k, the
k-points of these functors are just the elements of Pic(Xk).
□
Answer 3.2. By deﬁnition, a section in H0(X, L)reg corresponds to an injec-
tion L−1 ֒→OX. Its image is an ideal I such that L−1
∼
−→I. So I is the ideal of
an eﬀective divisor D. Then OX(−D) = I. So L−1
∼
−→OX(−D). Taking inverses
yields OX(D) ≃L. So D ∈|L|. Thus we have a map H0(X, L)reg →|L|.
If the section is multiplied by a unit in H0(X, O∗
X), then the injection L−1 ֒→OX
is multiplied by the same unit, so has the same image I; so then D is unaltered.
Conversely, if D arises from a second section, corresponding to a second isomor-
phism L−1
∼
−→I, then these two isomorphism diﬀer by an automorphism of L−1,
which is given by multiplication by a unit in H0(X, O∗
X); so then the two sections
diﬀer by multiplication by this unit. Thus H0(X, L)reg

H0(X, O∗
X) ֒→|L|.
Finally, given D ∈|L|, by deﬁnition there exist an isomorphism OX(D) ≃L.
Since OX(−D) is the ideal I of D, the inclusion I ֒→OX yields an injection
L−1 ֒→OX. The latter corresponds to a section in H0(X, L)reg, which yields D via
the procedure of the ﬁrst paragraph. Thus H0(X, L)reg

H0(X, O∗
X)
∼
−→|L|.
□
Answer 3.5. Let x ∈D + E. If x /∈D ∩E, then D + E is a relative eﬀective
divisor at x, as D + E is equal to D or to E on a neighborhood of x. So suppose
x ∈D ∩E. Then Lemma 3.4 says X is S-ﬂat at x, and each of D and E is cut out
at x by one element that is regular on the ﬁber Xs through x. Form the product
of the two elements. Plainly, it cuts out D + E at x, and it too is regular on Xs.
Hence D + E is a relative eﬀective divisor at x by Lemma 3.4 again.
□
Answer 3.8. Consider a relative eﬀective divisor D on XT /T . Each ﬁber Dt
is of dimension 0. So its Hilbert polynomial χ(ODt(n)) is constant. Its value is
dim H0(ODt), which is just the degree of Dt.
The assertions are local on S; so we may assume X/S is projective. Then


PDF PAGE 64
64
S. L. KLEIMAN
DivX/S is representable by an open subscheme DivX/S ⊂HilbX/S by Theo-
rem 3.7. And HilbX/S is the disjoint union of open and closed subschemes of ﬁnite
type Hilbφ
X/S that parameterize the subschemes with Hilbert polynomial φ. Set
Divm
X/S := DivX/S
T Hilbm
X/S. Then the Divm
X/S have all the desired properties.
In general, whenever X/S is separated, X represents Hilb1
X/S, and the diagonal
subscheme ∆⊂X × X is the universal subscheme. Indeed, the projection ∆→X
is an isomorphism, so ∆∈Hilb1
X/S(X). Now, given any S-map g : T →X, note
(1 × g)−1∆= Γg where Γg ⊂X × T is the graph subscheme of g, because the
T ′-points of both (1 × g)−1∆and Γg are just the pairs (gp, p) where p: T ′ →T . So
Γg ∈Hilb1
X/S(T ).
Conversely, let Γ ∈Hilb1
X/S(T ). So Γ is a closed subscheme of X × T . The
projection π: Γ →T is proper, and its ﬁbers are ﬁnite; hence, it is ﬁnite by Cheval-
ley’s Theorem [EGA III1, 4.4.2]. So Γ = Spec(π∗OΓ). Moreover, π∗OΓ is locally
free, being ﬂat and ﬁnitely generated over OT . And forming π∗OΓ commutes with
passing to the ﬁbers, so its rank is 1. Hence OT
∼
−→π∗OΓ. Therefore, π is an
isomorphism. Hence Γ is the graph of a map g: T →X. So, (1 × g)−1∆= Γ by
the above; also, g is the only map with this property, since a map is determined by
its graph. Thus X represents Hilb1
X/S, and ∆⊂X ×X is the universal subscheme.
In the case at hand, Div1
X/S is therefore representable by an open subscheme
U ⊂X by Theorem 3.7. In fact, its proof shows U is formed by the points x ∈X
where the ﬁber ∆x is a divisor on Xx. Now, ∆x is a kx-rational point for any
x ∈X; so ∆x is a divisor if and only if Xx is regular at ∆x. Since X/S is ﬂat, Xx
is regular at ∆x if and only if x ∈X0. Thus X0 = Div1
X/S.
Finally, set T := Xm
0
and let Γi ⊂X × T be the graph subscheme of the
ith projection. By the above analysis, Γi ∈Div1
X/S(T ). Set Γ := P Γi. Then
Γ ∈Divm
X/S(T ) owing to Exercise 3.5 and to the additivity of degree. Plainly Γ
represents the desired T -point of Divm
X/S.
□
Answer 3.11. Let s ∈S. Let K be the algebraically closure of ks, and set
A := H0(XK, OXK).
Since f is proper, A is ﬁnite dimensional as a K-vector
space; so A is an Artin ring. Since XK is connected, A is not a product of two
nonzero rings by [EGA III2, 7.8.6.1]; so A is an Artin local ring. Since XK is
reduced, A is reduced; so A is a ﬁeld, which is a ﬁnite extension of K. Since K is
algebraically closed, therefore A = K. Since cohomology commutes with ﬂat base
change, consequently ks
∼
−→H0(X, OXs).
The isomorphism ks
∼
−→H0(X, OXs) factors through f∗(OX) ⊗ks:
ks →f∗(OX) ⊗ks →H0(Xs, OXs).
So the second map is a surjection.
Hence this map is an isomorphism by the
implication (iv)⇒(iii) of Subsection 3.10 with F := OX and N := ks. Therefore,
the ﬁrst map is an isomorphism too.
It follows that OS →f∗OX is surjective at s. Indeed, denote its cokernel by G.
Since tensor product is right exact and since ks →f∗(OX) ⊗ks is an isomorphism,
G ⊗ks = 0. So by Nakayama’s lemma, the stalk Gs vanishes, as claimed
Let Q be the OS-module associated to F := OX as in Subsection 3.10. Then
Q is free at s by the implication (iv)⇒(i) of Subsection 3.10. And rank Qs = 1
owing to the isomorphism in (3.10.1) with N := ks.
But, with N := OS, the
isomorphism becomes Hom(Q, OX)
∼
−→f∗OX. Hence f∗OX too is free of rank 1


PDF PAGE 65
THE PICARD SCHEME
65
at s. Therefore, the surjection OS →f∗OX is an isomorphism at s. Since s is
arbitrary, OS
∼
−→f∗OX everywhere.
Finally, let T be an arbitrary S-scheme. Then fT : XT →T too is proper and
ﬂat, and its geometric ﬁbers are reduced and connected. Hence, by what we just
proved, OT
∼
−→fT ∗OXT .
□
Answer 3.14. By Theorem 3.13, L represents LinSysL/X/S. So by Yoneda’s
Lemma [EGA G, (0,1.1.4), p. 20], there exists a W ∈LinSysL/X/S(L) possessing
the required universal property. And W corresponds to the identity map p: L →L.
The proof of Theorem 3.13 now shows OXL(W) = (L|XL) ⊗f ∗
LOL(1).
□
Answer 4.2. The structure sheaf OX deﬁnes a section σ: S →PicX/S. Its
image is a subscheme, which is closed if PicX/S is separated, by [EGA G, Cors.
(5.1.4), p. 275, and (5.2.4), p. 278]. Let N ⊂T be the pullback of this subscheme
under the map λ: T →PicX/S deﬁned by L. Then the third property holds.
Both LN and OX deﬁne the same map N →PicX/S. So, since OS
∼
−→f∗OX
holds universally, the Comparison Theorem, Theorem, Theorem 2.5, implies that
there exists an invertible sheaf N on N such that the ﬁrst property holds.
Consider the second property.
Then LT ′ ≃f ∗
T ′N ′.
So λt: T ′ →PicX/S
is also deﬁned by OXT ′ ; hence, λt factors through σ: S →PicX/S. Therefore,
t: T ′ →T factors through N. So, since the ﬁrst property holds, LT ′ ≃f ∗
T ′t∗N.
Hence N ′ ≃t∗N by Lemma (2.7). Thus the second property holds.
Finally, suppose the pair (N1, N1) also possesses the ﬁrst property. Taking t to
be the inclusion of N1 into T , we conclude that N1 ⊂N and N1 ≃N|N. Suppose
(N1, N1) possess the second property too. Then, similarly, N ⊂N1. Thus N = N1
and N1 ≃N, as desired.
□
Answer 4.3. By Yoneda’s Lemma [EGA G, (0,1.1.4), p. 20], a universal sheaf
P exists if and only if PicX/S represents PicX/S. Set P := PicX/S.
Assume P exists. Then, for any invertible sheaf N on P, plainly P ⊗f ∗
P N is
also a universal sheaf. Moreover, if P′ is also a universal sheaf, then P′ ≃P ⊗f ∗
PN
for some invertible sheaf N on P by the deﬁnition with h := 1P .
Assume OS
∼
−→f∗OX holds universally. If P ⊗f ∗
P N ≃P ⊗f ∗
P N ′ for some
invertible sheaves N and N ′ on P, then N ≃N ′ by Lemma 2.7.
By Part 2 of Theorem 2.5, if also f has a section, then PicX/S does represent
PicX/S; so then P exists. Furthermore, the curve X/R of Exercise 2.4 provides an
example where no P exists, because Pic(X/R) (´et) is representable by Theorem 4.8,
but PicX/R is not since the two functors diﬀer.
□
Answer 4.4. Say PicX/S represents Pic(X/S) (´et). Now, for any S′-scheme T ,
Pic(XS′/S′) (´et)(T ) = Pic(X/S) (´et)(T ),
which holds essentially by deﬁnition, since a map of S′-schemes is an ´etale-covering
if and only if it is an ´etale-covering when viewed as a map of S-schemes. However,
(PicX/S ×SS′)(T ) = PicX/S(T )
because the structure map T →S′ is ﬁxed. Since the right-hand sides of the two
displayed equations are equal, so are their left-hand sides. Thus PicX/S ×SS′ rep-
resents Pic(XS′/S′) (´et). Of course, a similar analysis applies when PicX/S represents
one of the other relative Picard functors.
An example is provided by the curve X ⊂P2
R of Exercise 2.4. Indeed, since the


PDF PAGE 66
66
S. L. KLEIMAN
functors PicX/R and Pic(X/R) (´et) diﬀer, PicX/R is not representable. But Pic(X/R) (´et)
is representable by the Main Theorem, 4.8. Finally, since XC has a C-point, all its
relative Picard functors are equal by the Comparison Theorem, 2.5.
□
Answer 4.5. An L on an Xk deﬁnes a map Spec(k) →PicX/S; assign its
image to L. Then, given any ﬁeld k′′ containing k, the pullback L|Xk′′ is assigned
the same scheme point of PicX/S.
Consider an L′ on an Xk′. If L and L′ represent the same class, then there
is a k′′ containing both k and k′ such that L|Xk′′ ≃L′|Xk′′; hence, then both L
and L′ are assigned the same scheme point of PicX/S. Conversely, if L and L′
are assigned the same point, take k′′ to be any algebraically closed ﬁeld containing
both k and k′. Then L|Xk′′ and L′|Xk′′ deﬁne the same map Spec(k′′) →PicX/S.
Hence L|Xk′′ ≃L′|Xk′′ by Exercise 2.3 or 2.6.
Finally, given any scheme point of PicX/S, let k be the algebraic closure of its
residue ﬁeld. Then Spec(k) →PicX/S is deﬁned by an L on Xk by Exercise 2.3 or
2.6. So the given point is assigned to L. Thus the classes of invertible sheaves on
the ﬁbers of X/S correspond bijectively to the scheme points of PicX/S.
□
Answer 4.7. An S-map h: T →DivX/S corresponds to a relative eﬀective
divisor D on XT . So the composition AX/Sh: T →P corresponds to the invertible
sheaf OXT (D). Hence OXT (D) ≃(1 × AX/Sh)∗P ⊗f ∗
P N for some invertible sheaf
N on T . Therefore, if T is viewed as a P-scheme via AX/Sh, then D deﬁnes a
T -point η of LinSysP/X×P/P . Plainly, the assignment h 7→η is functorial in T .
Thus if DivX/S is viewed as a P-scheme via AX/S, then there is a natural map Λ
from its functor of points to LinSysP/X×P/P .
Furthermore, Λ is an isomorphism. Indeed, let T be a P-scheme. A T -point
η of LinSysP/X×P/P is given by a relative eﬀective divisor D on XT such that
OXT (D) ≃PT ⊗f ∗
T N for some invertible sheaf N on T . Then OXT (D) and PT
deﬁne the same S-map T →P. But PT deﬁnes the structure map. And OXT (D)
deﬁnes the composition AX/Sh where h: T →DivX/S is the map deﬁned by D.
Thus η = Λ(h), and h is determined by η; hence, Λ is an isomorphism.
In other words, DivX/S represents LinSysP/X×P/P . But P(Q) too represents
LinSysP/X×P/P by Theorem 3.13. Therefore, P(Q) = DivX/S as P-schemes.
□
Answer 4.10. First, suppose F →G is a surjection. Given a map of ´etale
sheaves ϕ: F →H such that the two maps F ×G F →H are equal, we must show
there is one and only one map G →H such that F →G →H is equal to ϕ.
Let η ∈G(T ).
By hypothesis, there exist an ´etale covering T ′ →T and
an element ζ′ ∈F(T ′) such that ζ′ and η have the same image in G(T ′).
Set
T ′′ := T ′ ×T T ′.
Then the two images of ζ′ in F(T ′′) deﬁne an element ζ′′ of
(F ×G F)(T ′′). Since the two maps F ×G F →H are equal, the two images of ζ′′ in
H(T ′′) are equal. But these two images are equal to those of ϕ(ζ′) ∈H(T ′). Since
H is a sheaf, therefore ϕ(ζ′) is the image of a unique element θ ∈H(T ).
Note θ ∈H(T ) is independent of the choice of T ′ and ζ′ ∈F(T ′). Indeed,
let ζ′
1 ∈F(T ′
1) be a second choice. Arguing as above, we ﬁnd ϕ(ζ′
1) ∈H(T ′
1) and
ϕ(ζ′) ∈H(T ′) have the same image in H(T ′
1 ×T T ′). So ζ′
1 also leads to θ.
Deﬁne a map G(T ) →H(T ) by η 7→θ. Plainly this map behaves functorially
in T . Thus there is a map of sheaves G →H. Plainly, F →G →H is equal to
ϕ: F →H. Finally, G →H is the only such map, since the image of η in H(T ) is
determined by the image of η in G(T ′), and the latter must map to ϕ(ζ′) ∈H(T ′).


PDF PAGE 67
THE PICARD SCHEME
67
Thus G is the coequalizer of F ×G F ⇉F.
Conversely, suppose G is the coequalizer of F ×G F ⇉F.
Form the ´etale
subsheaf H ⊂G associated to the presheaf whose T -points are the images in G(T )
of the elements of F(T ). Then the map F →G factors through H. So the two
maps F ×G F →H are equal. Since G is the coequalizer, there is a map G →H
so that F →G →H is equal to F →H. Hence F →G →H ֒→G is equal to
F →G. So G →H ֒→G is equal to 1G by uniqueness. Therefore, H = G. Thus
F →G is a surjection.
□
Answer 4.11. Theorem 4.8 implies each connected component Z′ of Z lies in
an increasing union of open quasi-projective subschemes of PicX/S. So Z′ lies in
one of them since Z′ is quasi-compact. So Z′ is quasi-projective. But Z has only
ﬁnitely many components Z′. Therefore, Z is quasi-projective.
□
Answer 4.12. Set P := PicX/S, which exists by Theorem 4.8. If P exists,
then AX/S is, by Exercise 4.7, the structure map of the bundle P(Q) where Q
denotes the coherent sheaf on PicX/S associated to P as in Subsection 3.10. In
particular, AX/S is projective Zariski locally over S.
In general, forming P commutes with extending S by Exercise 4.4. Similarly,
forming AX/S does too. But a map is proper if it is after an fppf base extension
by [EGA IV2, 2.7.1(vii)].
However, f : X →S is fppf. Moreover, fX : X × X →X has a section, namely,
the diagonal. So use f as a base extension. Then, by Exercises 3.11 and 4.3, a
universal sheaf P exists. Therefore, AX/S is proper by the ﬁrst case.
□
Answer 4.13. Let’s use the ideas and notation of Answer 4.12.
Now, X0
represents Div1
X/S by Exercise 3.8. Hence the Abel map AX/S induces a natural
map A: X0 →P, and forming A commutes with extending S. But a map is a
closed embedding if it is after an fppf base extension by [EGA IV2, 2.7.1(xii)]. So
we may assume P(Q) = DivX/S.
The function λ 7→deg Pλ is locally constant. Let W ⊂P be the open and
closed subset where the function’s value is 1. Plainly P(QW ) = Div1
X/S owing to
the above. Therefore, X0 = P(QW ), and A: X0 →P is equal to the structure map
of P(QW ). So it remains to show that this structure map is a closed embedding.
Fix λ ∈W. Then dimkλ(Q ⊗kλ) = dimkλ H0(Xλ, Pλ). Suppose Pλ has two
independent global sections. Each deﬁnes an eﬀective divisor of degree 1, which is
a kλ-rational point xi. Since neither section is a multiple of the other, the xi are
distinct. Hence the sections generate Pλ. So they deﬁne a map h: Xλ →P1
kλ by
[EGA II, 4.2.3] or [Ha83, Thm. II, 7.1, p. 150]. Then h is birational since each xi
is the scheme-theoretic inverse image of a kλ-rational point of P1
kλ. Hence h is an
isomorphism. But, by hypothesis, Xλ is of arithmetic genus at least 1. So there is
a contradiction. Therefore, dimkλ(Q ⊗kλ) ≤1.
By Nakayama’s lemma, Q can be generated by a single element on a neighbor-
hood V ⊂W of λ. So there is a surjection OV ։ QV . It deﬁnes a closed embedding
P(QV ) ֒→P(OV ). But the structure map P(OV ) →V is an isomorphism. Hence
P(QV ) →V is a closed embedding. But λ ∈W is arbitrary. So P(QW ) →W is
indeed a closed embedding.
□
Answer 4.15. Representing PicX/S is similar to representing PicX′/S′ in Ex-
ample 4.14, but simpler. Indeed, On X ×S ZS, form an invertible sheaf P by placing


PDF PAGE 68
68
S. L. KLEIMAN
OX(n) on the nth copy of X. Then it suﬃces to show this: given any S-scheme
T and any invertible sheaf L on XT , there exist a unique S-map q: T →ZS and
some invertible sheaf N on T such that (1 × q)∗P = L ⊗f ∗
T N.
Plainly, we may assume T is connected. Then the function s 7→χ(Xt, Lt) is
constant on T by [EGA III2, 7.9.11]. Now, Xt is a projective space of dimension
at least 1 over the residue ﬁeld kt; so Lt ≃OXt(n) for some n by [Ha83, Prp. 6.4,
p. 132, and Cors. 6.16 and 6.17, p. 145]. Hence n is independent of t.
Set M := L−1(n). Then Mt ≃OXt for all t ∈T . Hence H1(Xt, Mt) = 0
and H0(Xt, Mt) = kt by Serre’s explicit computation [EGA III1, 2.1.12]. Hence
fT∗M is invertible, and forming it commutes with changing the base T , owing to
the theory in Subsection 3.10.
Set N := fT ∗M. Consider the natural map u: f ∗
T N →M. Forming u com-
mutes with changing T , since forming N does. But u is an isomorphism on the ﬁber
over each t ∈T . So u ⊗kt is an isomorphism. Hence u is surjective by Nakayama’s
lemma. But both source and target of u are invertible; so u is an isomorphism.
Hence L ⊗f ∗
T N = OXT (n).
Let q: T →ZS be the composition of the structure map T →S and the nth
inclusion S ֒→ZS. Plainly (1 × q)∗P = OXT (n), and q is the only such S-map.
Thus ZS represents PicX/S, and P is a universal sheaf.
□
Answer 4.16. First of all, PicX/R exists by Theorem 4.8. Now, XC ≃P1
C.
Hence PicX/R ×RC ≃ZC by Exercises 4.4 and 4.15. The induced automorphism of
ZC⊗RC is the identity; indeed, a point of this scheme corresponds to an invertible
sheaf on P1
C, and every such sheaf is isomorphic to its pullback under any R-
automorphism of P1
C. Hence, by descent theory, PicX/R = ZR.
The above reasoning leads to a second proof Pic(X/R) (´et) is representable. In-
deed, set P := Pic(X/R) (´et). By the above, the pair (P ⊗R C)⊗C (C⊗R C) ⇉P ⊗R C
is representable by the pair ZC⊗RC ⇉ZC, whose coequalizer is ZR. On the other
hand, in the category of ´etale sheaves, the coequalizer is P owing to Exercise 4.10.
Notice in passing that PicX/R = PicP1
R/R. However, PicX/R is not representable
owing to Exercise 2.4, where as PicP1
R/R is representable owing to Exercise 4.15.
□
Answer 5.7. Exercise 4.11 implies Z is quasi-projective. Hence Z is projective
if Z is proper. By [EGA IV2, 2.7.1], an S-scheme is proper if it is so after an fppf
base change, such as f : X →S. But fX : X × X →X has a section, namely, the
diagonal. Thus we may assume f has a section.
Using the Valuative Criterion for Properness [Ha83, Thm. 4.7, p. 101], we need
only check this statement: given an S-scheme T of the form T = Spec(A) where
A is a valuation ring, say with fraction ﬁeld K, every S-map u: Spec(K) →Z
extends to an S-map T →Z. We do not need to check the extension is unique if it
exists; indeed, this uniqueness holds by the Valuative Criterion for Separatedness
[Ha83, Thm. 4.3, p. 97] since Z is quasi-projective, so separated.
Since f has a section, u arises from an invertible sheaf L on XK by Theorem 2.5.
We have to extend L over XT . Indeed, this extension deﬁnes a map t: T →PicX/S
extending u, and t factors through Z because Z is closed and T is integral.
Plainly it suﬃces to extend L(n) for any n ≫0. So replacing L if need be, we
may assume L has a nonzero section. It is regular since XK is integral. So XK has
a divisor D such that O(D) = L.
Let D′ ⊂XT be the closure of D. Now, X/S is smooth and T is regular, so


PDF PAGE 69
THE PICARD SCHEME
69
XT is regular by [EGA IV2, 6.5.2], so factorial by [EGA IV2, 21.11.1]. Hence D′
is a divisor. And O(D′) extends L.
□
Answer 5.16. Serre’s Theorem [Ha83, Thm. 5.2, p. 228] yields Hi(Ω2
X(n)) =
0 for i > 0 and n ≫0. So φ(n) = χ(Ω2
X(n)). Hence
q = H1(Ω2
X) −H2(Ω2
X) + 1.
Serre duality [Ha83, Cor. 7.13, p. 247] yields dim Hi(Ωi
X) = dim H2−i(OX) for all
i. And dim H0(OX) = 1 since X is projective and geometrically integral. So
q = dim H1(OX).
Hence Corollary 5.14 yields dim PicX/S ≤q, with equality in characteristic 0.
□
Answer 5.17. Set P := PicX/S, which exists by Theorem 4.8. By Exercises
3.11 and 4.3, there exists a universal sheaf P on X × P
Suppose q = 0. Then P is smooth of dimension 0 everywhere by Corollary 5.13.
Let D be a relative eﬀective divisor on XT /T where T is a connected S-scheme.
Then OXT (D) deﬁnes a map τ : T →P, and
OXT (D) ≃(1 × τ)∗P ⊗f ∗
T N
for some invertible sheaf N on T .
Now, T is connected and P is discrete and
reduced; so τ is constant. Set λ := τT , and view Pλ as an invertible sheaf L on X.
Then LT = (1 × τ)∗P. So OXT (D) ≃LT ⊗f ∗
TN, as required.
Consider the converse. Again by Exercise 4.3, there is a coherent sheaf Q on
P such that P(Q) = DivX/S. Furthermore, Q is nonzero and locally free at any
closed point λ representing an invertible sheaf L on X such that H1(L) = 0 by
Subsection 3.10; for example, take L := OX(n) for n ≫0.
Let U ⊂P be a connected open neighborhood of λ on which Q is free. Let
T ⊂P(Q) be the preimage of U, and let D be the universal relative eﬀective divisor
on XT /T . Then the natural map A: T →U is smooth with irreducible ﬁbers. So
T is connected. Moreover, A is the map deﬁned by OXT (D).
Suppose OXT (D) ≃MT ⊗f ∗
T N for some invertible sheaves M on X and N
on T . Then A: T →U is also deﬁned by MT . Say µ ∈P represents M. Then
A factors through the inclusion of the closed point µ. Hence µ = λ; moreover,
since A is smooth and surjective, its image, the open set U, is just the reduced
closed point λ. Now, there is an automorphism of P that carries 0 to λ, namely,
“multiplication” by λ. So P is smooth of dimension 0 at 0. Therefore, q = 0 by
Corollary 5.13.
In characteristic 0, a priori P is smooth by Corollary 5.14. Now, A: T →U is
smooth. Hence, T is smooth too. But the preceding argument shows that, if the
condition holds for this T , then q = 0, as required.
□
Answer 5.23. By hypothesis, dim Xs = 1 for s ∈S; so H2(OXs) = 0. Hence
the Pic0
Xs/ks are smooth by Proposition 5.19, so of dimension pa by Proposi-
tion 5.13. Hence, by Proposition 5.20, the Pic0
Xs/ks form a family of ﬁnite type,
whose total space is the open subscheme Pic0
X/S of PicX/S. And PicX/S is smooth
over S again by Proposition 5.19.
Hence Pic0
X/S is quasi-projective by Exercise 4.11.
If X/S is smooth, then Pic0
X/S is projective over S by Exercise 5.7. Alterna-
tively, use Theorem 5.4 and Proposition 5.20 again to conclude Pic0
X/S is proper,


PDF PAGE 70
70
S. L. KLEIMAN
so projective since it is quasi-projective.
Conversely, assume Pic0
X/S is proper, and let us prove X/S is smooth, Since
X/S is ﬂat, we need only prove each Xs is smooth.
So we may replace S by
the spectrum of the algebraic closure of ks. If pa = 0, then X is smooth, indeed
X = P1, by [Ha83, Ex. 1.8(b), p. 298].
Suppose pa > 0. Let X0 be the open subscheme where X is smooth. Then
there is a closed embedding A: X0 ֒→PicX/S by Exercise 4.13. Its image consists
of points λ representing invertible sheaves of degree 1.
Fix a rational point λ,
and deﬁne an automorphism β of PicX/S by β(κ) := κλ−1. Then βA is a closed
embedding of X0 in Pic0
X/S.
By assumption, Pic0
X/S is proper. So X0 is proper. Hence X0 ֒→X is proper
since X is separated. Hence X0 is closed in X. But X0 is dense in X since X is
integral and the ground ﬁeld is algebraically closed. Hence X0 = X; in other words,
X is smooth.
□
Answer 6.4. As before, by Lemma 6.6, there is an m such that every N(m)
is generated by its global sections. So there is a section that does not vanish at
any given associated point of X; since these points are ﬁnite in number, if σ is
a general linear combination of the corresponding sections, then σ vanishes at no
associated point. So σ is regular, whence deﬁnes an eﬀective divisor D such that
OX(−D) = N −1(−m).
Plainly N −1 is numerically equivalent to OX too. So χ(N −1(n)) = χ(OX(n))
by Lemma 6.6. Hence the sequence 0 →OX(−D) →OX →OD →0 yields
χ(OD(n)) = ψ(n) where ψ(n) := χ(OX(n)) −χ(OX(n −m)).
Let T ⊂DivX/k be the open and closed subscheme parameterizing the eﬀective
divisors with Hilbert polynomial ψ(n). Then T is a k-scheme of ﬁnite type. Let M′
be the invertible sheaf on XT associated to the universal divisor; set M := M′(−n).
Then there exists a rational point t ∈T such that N = Mt. Thus the N numerically
equivalent to OX form a bounded family.
□
Answer 6.7. Suppose a < ar.
Suppose L(−1) has a nonzero section.
It
deﬁnes an eﬀective divisor D, possibly 0. Hence
0 ≤
R
hr−1[D] =
R
hr−1ℓ−
R
hr = a −ar < 0,
which is absurd. Thus H0(L(−1)) = 0.
Let H be a hyperplane section of X. Then there is an exact sequence
0 →L(n −1) →L(n) →LH(n) →0.
It yields the following bound:
dim H0(L(n)) −dim H0(L(n −1)) ≤dim H0(LH(n)).
(A.6.7.1)
Since
 n+i
i

−
 n−1+i
i

=
 n+i−1
i−1

, the sequence also yields the following formula:
χ(LH(n)) = P
0≤i≤r−1 ai+1
 n+i
i

.
Suppose r = 1. Then dim H0(LH(n)) = χ(LH(n)) = a1. Therefore, owing to
Equation (A.6.7.1), induction on n yields dim H0(L(n)) ≤a1(n + 1), as desired.
Furthermore, LH is 0-regular. Set m := dim H1(L(−1)). Then L is m-regular
by Mumford’s conclusion at the bottom of [Mm66, p. 102]. But
m = dim H0(L(−1)) −χ(L(−1)) = 0 −a1(−1 + 1) −a0 = −a0.


PDF PAGE 71
THE PICARD SCHEME
71
Thus we may take Φ1(u0) := −u0 where u0 is an indeterminate.
Suppose r ≥2. Then we may take H irreducible by Bertini’s Theorem [Se50,
Thm. 12, p. 374] or [Jo79, Cor. 6.7, p. 80]. Set h1 := c1OH(1) and ℓ1 := c1LH.
Then
R
ℓ1hr−2
1
=
R
ℓhr−2[H] = a < ar. So by induction on r, we may assume
dim H0(LH(n)) ≤ar
 n+r−1
r−1

.
Therefore, owing to Equation (A.6.7.1), induction on n yields the desired bound.
Furthermore, we may assume LH is m1-regular where m1 := Φr−1(a1 . . . , ar−1).
Set m := m1 + dim H1(L(m1 −1)). By Mumford’s same work, L is m-regular. But
m = m1 + dim H0(L(m1 −1)) −χ(L(m1 −1))
≤m1 + ar
 m1−1+r
r

−P
0≤i≤r ai
 m1−1+i
i

.
The latter expression is a polynomial in a0, . . . , ar−1 and m1. So it is a polynomial
Φr in a0, . . . , ar−1 alone, as desired.
In general, consider N := L(−a). Then
χ(N(n)) = P
0≤i≤r bi
 n+i
i

where bi := Pr−i
j=0 ai+j(−1)j a−i−j
j

.
Set ν := c1N and b :=
R
νhr−1. Then
b =
R
ℓhr−1 −a
R
hr = a −aar ≤0 < ar.
Hence N is m-regular where m := Φr(b0, . . . , br−1). But the bi are polynomials in
a0, . . . , ar and a. Hence there is a polynomial Ψr depending only on r such that
m := Ψr(a0, . . . , ar; a), as desired.
□
Answer 6.10. Let k′ be the algebraic closure of k. If H ⊗k′ ⊂Gτ ⊗k′, then
H ⊂Gτ. But Gτ ⊗k′ = (G ⊗k′)τ by Lemma 6.10. Thus we may assume k = k′.
Then H ⊂S
h∈H(k) hG0. But G0 is open, so hG0 is too. And H is quasi-
compact. So H lies in ﬁnitely many hG0. So G0(k) has ﬁnite index in H(k)G0(k),
say n. Then hn ∈G0(k) for every h ∈H(k). So ϕn(H) ⊂G0. Thus H ⊂Gτ.
□
Answer 6.11. For any n, plainly L⊗n corresponds to ϕnλ. And L⊗n is alge-
braically equivalent to OX if and only if ϕnλ ∈Pic0
X/k by Proposition 5.10. So L
is τ-equivalent to OX if and only if λ ∈Picτ
X/k by Deﬁnitions 6.1 and 6.8.
□
Answer 6.13. Theorem 4.8 implies PicX/k exists and represents Pic(X/S) (´et).
So Picτ
X/k is of ﬁnite type by Proposition 6.12. Hence Picτ
X/k is quasi-projective
by Exercise 4.11.
Suppose X is also geometrically normal. Since Picτ
X/k is quasi-projective, to
prove it is projective, it suﬃces to prove it is complete. By Proposition 6.12, forming
Pic0
X/k commutes with extending k. And by [EGA IV2, 2.7.1(vii)], a k-scheme is
complete if (and only if) it is after extending k. So assume k is algebraically closed.
As λ ranges over the k-points of Picτ
X/k, the cosets λ Pic0
X/k cover Picτ
X/k. So
ﬁnitely many cosets cover, since Pic0
X/k is an open by Proposition 5.3 and since
Picτ
X/k is quasi-compact, Now, Pic0
X/k is projective by Theorem 5.4, so complete,
And Picτ
X/k is closed again by Proposition 6.12. Therefore, Picτ
X/k is complete.
□
Answer 6.15. Suppose L is bounded. Then M deﬁnes a map θ: T →PicX/S,
and θ(T ) ⊃Λ. Since T is Noetherian, plainly so is θ(T ); whence, plainly so is any
subspace of θ(T ). Thus Λ is quasi-compact.
Conversely, suppose Λ is quasi-compact. Since PicX/S is locally of ﬁnite type


PDF PAGE 72
72
S. L. KLEIMAN
by Proposition 4.17, there is an open subscheme of ﬁnite type containing any given
point of Λ. So ﬁnitely many of the subschemes cover Λ. Denote their union by U.
The inclusion U ֒→PicX/S is deﬁned by an invertible sheaf M on XT for some
fppf covering T →U. Replace T be an open subscheme so that T →U is of ﬁnite
type and surjective. Since U is of ﬁnite type, so is T . Given λ ∈Λ, let t ∈T map
to λ. Then λ corresponds to the class of Mt.
□
Answer 6.18. Theorem 6.16 asserts Picτ
X/S is of ﬁnite type. So it is projective
by Exercise 5.7.
□
Answer 6.21. Plainly, replacing S by an open subset, we may assume X/S is
projective and S is connected. Given s ∈S, set ψ(n) := χ(OXs(n)). Then ψ(n) is
independent of s. Given m, set φ(n) := m + ψ(n).
Let λ ∈PicX/S. Then λ ∈Picm
X/S if and only if λ represents an invertible
sheaf L of degree m. And λ ∈Picφ
X/S if and only if χ(L(n)) = φ(n). But,
χ(L(n)) = deg(L(n)) + ψ(0) = deg(L) + ψ(n)
by Riemann’s Theorem and the additivity of deg(•). Hence Picm
X/S = Picφ
X/S. So
Theorem 6.20 yields all the assertions, except for the two middle about Pic0
X/S.
To show Pic0
X/S = Picτ
X/S, similarly we need only show deg L = 0 if and only
if L is τ-equivalent to OX, for, by Exercise 6.11, the latter holds if and only if
λ ∈Picτ
X/S. Plainly, we may assume L lives on a geometric ﬁber of X/S. Then
the two conditions on L are equivalent by Theorem 6.3.
Since deg is additive, multiplication carries Pic0
X/S × Picm
X/S set-theoretically
into Picm
X/S. So Pic0
X/S acts on Picm
X/S since these two sets are open in PicX/S.
Since X/S is ﬂat with integral geometric ﬁbers, its smooth locus X0 provides
an fppf covering of S. Temporarily, make the base change X0 →S. After it, the
new map X0 →S has a section. Its image is a relative eﬀective divisor D, and
tensoring with OX(mD) deﬁnes the desired isomorphism from Pic0
X/S to Picm
X/S.
Finally, to show there is no abuse of notation, we must show the ﬁber (Pic0
X/S)s
is connected. To do so, we instead make the base change to the spectrum of an
algebraically closed ﬁeld k ⊃ks. Then X0 has a k-rational point D, and again
tensoring with OX(mD) deﬁnes an isomorphism from Pic0
X/k to Picm
X/k.
So it
suﬃces to show Picm
X/k is connected for some m ≥1.
Let β : Xm
0 →Divm
X/k →Picm
X/S be composition of the map α of Exercise 3.8
and the Abel map. Since X is integral, so is the m-fold product Xm
0 . Hence it
suﬃces to show β is surjective for some m ≥1.
By Exercise 6.7, there is an m0 ≥1 such that every invertible sheaf on X of
degree 0 is m0-regular. Set m := deg(OX(m0)). Then every invertible sheaf L on
X of degree m is 0-regular, so generated by its global sections.
In particular, for each singular point of X, there is a global section that does
not vanish at it. So, since k is inﬁnite, a general linear combination of these sections
vanishes at no singular point. This combination deﬁnes an eﬀective divisor E such
that OX(E) = L. It follows that β is surjective, as desired.
□
Answer 6.29. Suppose Λ is quasi-compact. Then, owing to Exercise 6.15,
there exist an S-scheme T of ﬁnite type and an invertible sheaf M on XT such
that every polynomial φ ∈Π is of the form φ(n) = χ(Mt(n)) for some t ∈T .
Hence, by [EGA III2, 7.9.4], the number of φ is at most the number of connected
components of T . Thus Π is ﬁnite.


PDF PAGE 73
THE PICARD SCHEME
73
Suppose Λ is connected.
Then its closure is too.
So we may assume Λ is
closed. Give Λ its reduced subscheme structure. Then the inclusion Λ ֒→PicX/S
is deﬁned by an invertible sheaf M on XT for some fppf covering T →Λ. Fix
t ∈T and set φ(n) := χ(Mt(n)). Fix n, and form the set T ′ of points t′ of T
such that χ(Mt′(n)) = φ(n). By [EGA III2, 7.9.4], the set T ′ is open, and so is
its complement. Hence their images are open in Λ, and plainly these images are
disjoint. But Λ is connected. Hence T ′ = T . Thus Π = {φ}.
□
Appendix B. Basic intersection theory
This appendix contains an elementary treatment of basic intersection theory,
which is more than suﬃcient for many purposes, including the needs of Section 6.
The approach was originated in 1959–60 by Snapper. His results were generalized
and his proofs were simpliﬁed immediately afterward by Cartier [Ca60].
Their
work was developed further in ﬁts and starts by the author.
The index theorem was proved by Hodge in 1937. Immediately afterward, B.
Segre [Se37, § 1] gave an algebraic proof for surfaces, and this proof was redis-
covered by Grothendieck in 1958.
Their work was generalized a tad in [Kl71,
p. 662], and a variation appears below in Theorem B.27. From the index theorem,
Segre [Se37, §6] derived a connectedness statement like Corollary B.29 for surfaces,
and the proof below is basically his.
Definition B.1. Let F(X/S) or F denote the Abelian category of coherent
sheaves F on X whose support Supp F is proper over an Artin subscheme of S, that
is, a 0-dimensional Noetherian closed subscheme. For each r ≥0, let Fr denote the
full subcategory of those F such that dim Supp F ≤r.
Let K(X/S) or K denote the “Grothendieck group” of F, namely, the free
Abelian group on the F, modulo short exact sequences. Abusing notation, let F
also denote its class. And if F = OY where Y ⊂X is a subscheme, then let [Y ]
also denote the class. Let Kr denote the subgroup generated by Fr.
Let χ: K →Z denote the homomorphism induced by the Euler characteristic,
which is just the alternating sum of the lengths of the cohomology groups.
Given L ∈Pic(X), let c1(L) denote the endomorphism of K deﬁned by the
following formula:
c1(L)F := F −L−1 ⊗F.
Note that c1(L) is well deﬁned since tensoring with L−1 preserves exact sequences.
Lemma B.2. Let L ∈Pic(X). Let Y ⊂X be a closed subscheme with OY ∈F.
Let D ⊂Y be an eﬀective divisor such that OY (D) ≃LY . Then
c1(L) · [Y ] = [D].
Proof. The left side is deﬁned since OY ∈F. The equation results from the
sequence 0 →OY (−D) →OY →OD →0 since OY (−D) ≃L−1 ⊗OY .
□
Lemma B.3. Let L, M ∈Pic(X). Then the following relations hold:
c1(L)c1(M) = c1(L) + c1(M) −c1(L ⊗M);
c1(L)c1(L−1) = c1(L) + c1(L−1);
c1(OX) = 0.
Furthermore, c1(L) and c1(M) commute.


PDF PAGE 74
74
S. L. KLEIMAN
Proof. Let F ∈K. By deﬁnition, c1(OX)F = 0; thus the third relation holds.
Plainly, each side of the ﬁrst relation carries F into
F −L−1 ⊗F −M−1 ⊗F + L−1 ⊗M−1 ⊗F.
Thus the ﬁrst relation holds. It and the third relation imply the second. Further-
more, the ﬁrst relation implies that c1(L) and c1(M) commute.
□
Lemma B.4. Given F ∈Fr, let Y1, . . . , Ys be the r-dimensional irreducible
components of Supp F equipped with their induced reduced structure, and let li be
the length of the stalk of F at the generic point of Yi. Then, in Kr,
F ≡
X
li · [Yi] mod Kr−1.
Proof. The assertion holds if it does after we replace S by a neighborhood of
the image of Supp F. So we may assume S is Noetherian.
Let F′ ⊂Fr denote the family of F for which the assertion holds.
Since
length(•) is an additive function, F′ is “exact” in the following sense: for any short
exact sequence 0 →F′ →F →F′′ →0 such that two of the Fs belong to F′, then
the third does too. Trivially, OY ∈F′ for any closed integral subscheme Y ⊂X
such that OY ∈Fr. Hence F′ = Fr by the “Lemma of D´evissage,” [EGA III1,
Thm. 3.1.2].
□
Lemma B.5. Let L ∈Pic(X). Then c1(L)Kr ⊂Kr−1 for all r.
Proof. Let F ∈Fr. Then F and L−1 ⊗F are isomorphic at the generic point
of each component of Supp F. So Lemma B.4 implies c1(L)F ∈Kr−1.
□
Lemma B.6. Let L ∈Pic(X), let F ∈Kr, and let m ∈Z. Then
L⊗m ⊗F = Pr
i=0
 m+i−1
i

c1(L)iF.
Proof. Let x be an indeterminate, and consider the formal identity
(1 −x)n = P
i≥0(−1)i n
i

xi.
Replace x by 1 −y−1, set n := −m, and use the familiar identity
(−1)i n
i

=
 m+i−1
i

,
to obtain the formal identity
ym = P  m+i−1
i

(1 −y−1)i.
It yields the assertion, because c1(L)iF = 0 for i > r owing to Lemma B.5.
□
Theorem B.7 (Snapper). Let L1, . . . , Ln ∈Pic(X), let m1, . . . , mn ∈Z, and
let F ∈Kr. Then the Euler characteristic χ
 L⊗m1
1
⊗· · · ⊗L⊗mn
n
⊗F

is given by
a polynomial in the mi of degree at most r. In fact,
χ
 L⊗m1
1
⊗· · · ⊗L⊗mn
n
⊗F

= P a(i1, . . . , in)
 m1+i1−1
i1

· · ·
 mn+in−1
in

where ij ≥0 and P ij ≤r and where a(i1, . . . , in) := χ
 c1(L1)i1 · · · c1(Ln)inF

.
Proof. The theorem follows from Lemmas B.6 and B.5.
□


PDF PAGE 75
THE PICARD SCHEME
75
Definition B.8. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X), repetitions allowed. Let F ∈Kr.
Deﬁne the intersection number or intersection symbol by the formula
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F := χ
 c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F

∈Z.
If F = OX, then also write
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr) for the number. If Lj = OX(Dj) for
a divisor Dj, then also write (D1 · · · Dr · F), or just (D1 · · · Dr) if F = OX.
Theorem B.9. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X) and F ∈Kr.
(1) If F ∈Fr−1, then
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F = 0.
(2) (symmetry and additivity) The symbol
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F is symmetric
in the Lj. Furthermore, it is a homomorphism separately in each Lj and in F.
(3) Set E := L−1
1
⊕· · · ⊕L−1
r . Then
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F = Pr
i=0(−1)iχ
  Vi E

⊗F

.
Proof. Part (1) results from Lemma B.5. So the symbol is a homomorphism
in each Lj owing to the relations asserted in Lemma B.3. Furthermore, the symbol
is symmetric owing to the commutativity asserted in Lemma B.3. Part (3) results
from the deﬁnitions.
□
Corollary B.10. Let L1, L2 ∈Pic(X) and F ∈K2. Then
R
c1(L1)c1(L2)F = χ(F) −χ(L−1
1
⊗F) −χ(L−1
2
⊗F) + χ(L−1
1
⊗L−1
2
⊗F).
Proof. The assertion is a special case of Part (3) of Proposition B.9.
□
Corollary B.11. Let D1, . . . , Dr be eﬀective divisors on X, and F ∈Fr. Set
Z := D1 ∩· · · ∩Dr. Suppose Z ∩Supp F is ﬁnite, and at each of its points, F is
Cohen–Macaulay. Then
(D1 · · · Dr · F) = length H0(FZ) where FZ := F ⊗OZ.
Proof. For each j, set Lj := OX(Dj) and let σj ∈H0(Lj) be the section
deﬁning Dj. Set E := L−1
1
⊕· · · ⊕L−1
r . Form the corresponding Koszul complex
(V• E

⊗F and its cohomology sheaves Hi  V• E

⊗F

. Then
R c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F = Pr
i=0(−1)iχ
 Hi  V• E

⊗F

.
owing to Part (3) of Proposition B.9 and to the additivity of χ.
Furthermore,
essentially by deﬁnition, H0  V• E

⊗F

= FZ. And by standard local algebra,
the higher Hi vanish. Thus the assertion holds.
□
Lemma B.12. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X) and F ∈Fr. Let Y1, . . . , Ys be the
r-dimensional irreducible components of Supp F given their induced reduced struc-
ture, and let li be the length of the stalk of F at the generic point of Yi. Then
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F = P
i li
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)[Yi].
Proof. Apply Lemma B.4 and Parts (1) and (2) of Proposition B.9.
□
Lemma B.13. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X) and Y ⊂X a closed subscheme with
OY ∈F. Let D ⊂Y be an eﬀective divisor such that OY (D) ≃Lr|Y . Then
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)[Y ] =
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr−1)[D].
Proof. Apply Lemma B.2.
□


PDF PAGE 76
76
S. L. KLEIMAN
Proposition B.14. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X) and F ∈Fr. If all the Lj are
relatively ample and if F /∈Kr−1, then
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F > 0.
Proof. Proceed by induction on r. If r = 0, then
R
F = dim H0(F) essentially
by deﬁnition, and H0(F) ̸= 0 since F /∈Kr−1 by hypothesis.
Suppose r ≥1. Owing to Proposition B.12, we may assume F = OY where Y
is integral. Owing to Part (2) of Theorem B.9, we may replace Lr by a multiple,
and so assume it is very ample.
Then, for the corresponding embedding of Y ,
a hyperplane section D is a nonempty eﬀective divisor such that OY (D) ≃Lr|Y .
Hence the assertion results from Proposition B.13 and the induction hypothesis.
□
Lemma B.15. Let g: X′ →X be an S-map. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X) and let
F ∈Fr(X′/S). Then
R
c1(g∗L1) · · · c1(g∗Lr)F =
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)g∗F.
Proof. Let G ∈Fr(X′/S). Then, by hypothesis, Supp G is proper over an
Artin subscheme of S, and dim Supp G ≤r; furthermore, X/S is separated. Hence,
the restriction g| Supp G is proper; so g(Supp G) is closed. And by the dimension
theory of schemes of ﬁnite type over Artin schemes, dim g(Supp G) ≤r. Therefore,
Rig∗G ∈Fr(X/S) for all i.
Deﬁne a map Fr(X′/S) →Kr(X/S) by G 7→Pr
i=0(−1)iRig∗G. It induces
a homomorphism Rg∗: Kr(X′/S) →Kr(X/S).
And χ(Rg∗(G)) = χ(G) owing
to the Leray Spectral Sequence [EGA III1, 0-12.2.4] and to the additivity of χ
[EGA III1, 0-11.10.3].
Furthermore, L ⊗Rig∗(G)
∼
−→Rig∗(g∗L ⊗G) for any
L ∈Pic(X) by [EGA III1, 0-12.2.3.1].
Hence c1(L)Rg∗(G) = Rg∗(c1(g∗L)G).
Therefore,
R
c1(g∗L1) · · · c1(g∗Lr)F =
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)Rg∗F.
Finally, Rg∗F ≡g∗F mod Kr−1(X/S), because Rig∗F ∈Fr−1 for i ≥1 since,
if W ⊂X′ is the locus where Supp F →X has ﬁbers of dimension at least 1, then
dim g(W) ≤r −1. So Part (1) of Theorem B.9 yields the asserted formula.
□
Proposition B.16 (Projection Formula). Let g: X′ →X be an S-map. Let
L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X). Let Y ′ ⊂X′ be an integral subscheme with OY ′ ∈Fr(X′/S).
Set Y := gY ′ ⊂X, give Y its induced reduced structure, and let deg(Y ′/Y ) be the
degree of the function ﬁeld extension if ﬁnite and be 0 if not. Then
R
c1(g∗L1) · · · c1(g∗Lr)[Y ′] = deg(Y ′/Y )
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)[Y ].
Proof. Lemma B.4 yields g∗OY ′ ≡deg(Y ′/Y )[Y ] mod Kr−1(X/S). So the
assertion results from Lemma B.15 and from Part (1) of Theorem B.9.
□
Proposition B.17. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, and let T be the
spectrum of an extension ﬁeld. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X) and F ∈Fr(X/S). Then
R
c1(L1,T ) · · · c1(Lr,T )FT =
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F.
Proof. The base change T →S preserves short exact sequences. So it in-
duces a homomorphism κ: Kr(X/S) →Kr(XT /T ). Plainly κ preserves the Euler
characteristic. The assertion now follows.
□


PDF PAGE 77
THE PICARD SCHEME
77
Proposition B.18. Let L1, . . . , Lr ∈Pic(X). Let F be a ﬂat coherent sheaf
on X. Assume Supp F is proper and of relative dimension r. Then the function
y 7→
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)Fy
is locally constant.
Proof. The assertion results from Deﬁnition B.8 and [Mm70, Cor., top p. 50].
□
Definition B.19. Let L, N ∈Pic(X). Call them numerically equivalent if
R
c1(L)[Y ] =
R
c1(N)[Y ] for all closed integral curves Y ⊂X with OY ∈F1.
Proposition B.20. Let L1, . . . , Lr; N1, . . . , Nr ∈Pic(X) and F ∈Kr. If Lj
and Nj are numerically equivalent for each j, then
R
c1(L1) · · · c1(Lr)F =
R
c1(N1) · · · c1(Nr)F.
Proof. If r = 1, then the assertion results from Lemma B.12. Suppose r ≥2.
Then c1(L2) · · · c1(Lr)F ∈K1 by Lemma B.5. Hence
R
c1(L1)c1(L2) · · · c1(Lr)F =
R
c1(N1)c1(L2) · · · c1(Lr)F.
Similarly, c1(N1)c1(L3) · · · c1(Lr)F ∈K1, and so
R
c1(N1)c1(L2)c1(L3) · · · c1(Lr)F =
R
c1(N1)c1(N2)c1(L3) · · · c1(Lr)F.
Continuing in this fashion yields the assertion.
□
Proposition B.21. Let g: X′ →X be an S-map. Let L, N ∈Pic(X).
(1) If L and N are numerically equivalent, then so are g∗L and g∗N.
(2) Conversely, when g is proper and surjective, if g∗L and g∗N are numerically
equivalent, then so are L and N.
Proof. Let Y ′ ⊂X′ be a closed integral curve with OY ′ ∈F1(X′/S). Set
Y := g(Y ′) and give Y its induced reduced structure. Then Proposition B.16 yields
R
c1(g∗L)[Y ′] = deg(Y ′/Y )
R
c1(L)[Y ] and
R
c1(g∗N)[Y ′] = deg(Y ′/Y )
R
c1(N)[Y ].
Part (1) follows.
Conversely, suppose g is proper and surjective. Let Y ⊂X be a closed integral
curve with OY ∈F1(X/S). Then Y is a complete curve in the ﬁber Xs over a
closed point s ∈S. Hence, since g is proper, there exists a complete curve Y ′ in X′
s
mapping onto Y . Indeed, let y ∈Y be the generic point, and y′ ∈g−1Y a closed
point; let Y ′ be the closure of y′ given Y ′ its induced reduced structure. Plainly
OY ′ ∈F1(X′/S) and deg(Y ′/Y ) ̸= 0. The two equations displayed above now
yield Part (2).
□
Definition B.22. Assume S is Artin, and X a proper curve. Let L ∈Pic(X).
Deﬁne its degree deg(L) by the formula
deg(L) :=
R
c1(L).
Let D be a divisor on X. Deﬁne its degree deg(D) by deg(D) := deg(OX(D)).


PDF PAGE 78
78
S. L. KLEIMAN
Proposition B.23. Assume S is Artin, and X a proper curve.
(1) The map deg: Pic(X) →Z is a homomorphism.
(2) Let D ⊂X be an eﬀective divisor. Then
deg(D) = dim H0(OD).
(3) (Riemann’s Theorem) Let L ∈Pic(X). Then
χ(L) = deg(L) + χ(OX).
(4) Suppose X is integral, and let g: X′ →X be the normalization map. Then
deg(L) = deg(g∗L).
Proof. Part (1) results from Theorem B.9 (2). And Part (2) results from
Lemma B.13. As to Part (3), note deg(L−1) = −deg(L) by Part (1). And the
deﬁnitions yield deg(L−1) = χ(OX) −χ(L). Thus Part (3) holds. Finally, Part (3)
results from the deﬁnition and the Projection Formula.
□
Definition B.24. Assume S is Artin, and X a proper surface. Given a divisor
D on X, set
pa(D) := 1 −χ
 c1(OX(D)) OX

.
Proposition B.25. Assume S is Artin, and X a proper surface. Let D and
E be divisors on X. Then
pa(D + E) = pa(D) + pa(E) + (D · E) −1.
Furthermore, if D is eﬀective, then
pa(D) = 1 −χ(OD);
in other words, pa(D) is equal to the arithmetic genus of D.
Proof. The assertions result from Lemmas B.3 and B.2.
□
Proposition B.26 (Riemann–Roch for surfaces). Assume S is the spectrum of
a ﬁeld, and X is a reduced, projective, equidimensional, Cohen–Macaulay surface.
Let ω be a dualizing sheaf, and set K := ω −OX. Let D be a divisor on X. Then
K ∈K1; furthermore,
pa(D) = (D2) + (D · K)
2
+ 1
and
χ(OX(D)) = (D2) −(D · K)
2
+ χ(OX).
If X/S is Gorenstein, that is, ω = OX(K) for some “canonical” divisor K, then
pa(D) =
 D · (D + K)

2
+ 1
and
χ(OX(D)) =
 D · (D −K)

2
+ χ(OX).
Proof. Since X is reduced, ω is isomorphic to OX on a dense open subset of
X by [AK70, (2.8), p. 8]. Hence K ∈K1.
Set L := OX(D). Then (D2) :=
R
c1(L)2 = −
R
c1(L)c1(L−1) by Parts (1) and
(2) of Theorem B.9. Now, the deﬁnitions yield
c1(L)(−c1(L−1)OX + K) = c1(L)(L −2OX + ω)
= L + ω −3OX + 2L−1 −L−1 ⊗ω
and
c1(L)(−c1(L−1)OX −K) = c1(L)(L −ω) = L −ω −OX + L−1 ⊗ω.
But, Hi(L) is dual to H2−i(L−1⊗ω) by duality theory; see [Ha83, Cor. 7.7, p. 244],


PDF PAGE 79
THE PICARD SCHEME
79
where k needn’t be taken algebraically closed. So χ(L) = χ(L−1 ⊗ω). Similarly,
χ(OX) = χ(ω). Therefore,
(D2) + (D · K) = 2(χ(L−1) −χ(OX))
and
(D2) −(D · K) = 2(χ(L) −χ(OX)).
Now, −c1(OX(D)) OX = L−1 −OX. The ﬁrst assertion follows.
Suppose ω is invertible. Then −c1(ω−1)OX = K owing to the deﬁnitions.
And −
R
c1(L)c1(ω−1) =
R
c1(L)c1(ω) by Part (2) of Theorem B.9. Therefore,
(D · K) = (D · K). Hence Part (2) of Theorem B.9 yields the second assertion.
□
Theorem B.27 (Hodge Index). Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, and X is
a geometrically irreducible complete surface. Assume there is an H ∈Pic(X) such
that
R
c1(H)2 > 0. Let L ∈Pic(X). Assume
R
c1(L)c1(H) = 0 and
R
c1(L)2 ≥0.
Then L is numerically equivalent to OX.
Proof. We may extend the ground ﬁeld to its algebraic closure owing to
Proposition B.17. Furthermore, we may replace X by its reduction; indeed, the
hypotheses are preserved due to Lemma B.12, and the conclusion is preserved due
to Deﬁnition B.19.
By Chow’s Lemma, there is a surjective map g: X′ →X where X′ is an integral
projective surface. Furthermore, we may replace X′ by its normalization. Now, we
may replace X by X′ and H and L by g∗H and g∗L. Indeed, the hypotheses are
preserved due to the Projection Formula, Proposition B.16. And the conclusion is
preserved due to Part (2) of Proposition B.21.
By way of contradiction, assume that there exists a closed integral subscheme
Y ⊂X such that R c1(L)OY ̸= 0. Let g: X′ →X be the blowing-up along Y ,
and E := g−1Y ⊂X the exceptional divisor. Let E1, . . . , Es be the irreducible
components of E, and give them their induced reduced structure.
Since X is normal, it has only ﬁnitely may singular points. Oﬀthem, Y is a
divisor, and g is an isomorphism. Hence one of the Ei, say E1 maps onto Y , and
the remaining Ei map onto points. Therefore,
R
c1(g∗L)[E1] =
R
c1(gL)[Y ] and
R
c1(g∗L)[Ei] = 0 for i ≥2 by the Projection Formula. Hence Lemma B.12 yields
R
c1(g∗L)[E] =
R
c1(L)[Y ]. The latter is nonzero by the new assumption, and the
former is equal to
R
c1(g∗L)c1(OX′(E)) by Lemma B.13.
Set M := OX′(E). Then
R
c1(g∗L)c1(M) ̸= 0. Moreover, by the Projection
Formula, R c1(g∗H) > 0 and R c1(g∗L)c1(g∗H) = 0 and R c1(g∗L)2 ≥0. Let’s prove
this situation is absurd. First, replace X by X′ and H and L by g∗H and g∗L.
Let G be an ample invertible sheaf on X. Set H1 := G⊗m ⊗M. Then
R
c1(L)c1(H1) = m
R
c1(L)c1(G) +
R
c1(L)c1(M)
by additivity (see Part (2) of Theorem B.9). Now,
R
c1(L)c1(M) ̸= 0. Hence there
is an m > 0 so that
R
c1(L)c1(H1) ̸= 0 and so that H1 is ample.
Set L1 := L⊗p ⊗H⊗q. Since
R
c1(L)c1(H) = 0, additivity yields
R
c1(L1)2 = p2 R
c1(L)2 + q2 R
c1(H)2, and
R
c1(L1)c1(H1) = p
R
c1(L)c1(H1) + q
R
c1(H)c1(H1).
Since R c1(L)c1(H1) ̸= 0, there are p, q with q ̸= 0 so that R c1(L1)c1(H1) = 0.
Then
R
c1(L1)2 > 0 since
R
c1(L)2 ≥0 and
R
c1(H)2 > 0. Replace L by L1 and H
by H1. Then H is ample,
R
c1(L)c1(H) = 0 and
R
c1(L)2 > 0.
Set N := L⊗n ⊗H−1 and H1 := L ⊗Ha. Take a > 0 so that H1 is ample. By


PDF PAGE 80
80
S. L. KLEIMAN
additivity,
R
c1(N)c1(H1) = n
R
c1(L)2 −a
R
c1(H)2.
Take n > 0 so that R c1(N)c1(H1) > 0. Then additivity and Proposition B.14 yield
R
c1(N)c1(H) = −
Z
c1(H)2 < 0,
Z
c1(N)2 = n2
Z
c1(L)2 +
Z
c1(H)2 > 0.
But this situation stands in contradiction to the next lemma.
□
Lemma B.28. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, and X is an integral surface.
Let N ∈Pic(X), and assume
R
c1(N)2 > 0. Then these conditions are equivalent:
(i) For every ample sheaf H, we have
R
c1(N)c1(H) > 0.
(i′) For some ample sheaf H, we have
R
c1(N)c1(H) > 0.
(ii) For some n > 0, we have H0(N ⊗n) ̸= 0.
Proof. Suppose (ii) holds. Then there exists an eﬀective divisor D such that
N ⊗n ≃OX(D). And D ̸= 0 since R c1(N)2 > 0. Hence (i) results as follows:
R
c1(N)c1(H) =
R
c1(H)c1(N) =
R
c1(H)[D] > 0
by symmetry, by Lemma B.13, and by Proposition B.14.
Trivially, (i) implies (i′). Finally, assume (i′), and let’s prove (ii). Let ω be
a dualizing sheaf for X; then ω is torsion free of rank 1, and H2(L) is dual to
Hom(L,ω) for any coherent sheaf F on X; see [FGA, p. 149-17], [AK70, (1.3),
p. 5, and (2.8), p. 8], and [Ha83, Prp, 7.2, p. 241]. Set K := ω −OX ∈K1.
Suppose L is invertible and H2(L) is nonzero. Then there is a nonzero map
L →ω, and it is injective since X is integral. Let F be its cokernel. Then
K = F −c1(L−1)OX in K1.
Hence Proposition B.14, symmetry, and additivity yield
R
c1(H)K ≥
R
c1(L)c1(H).
Take L := N ⊗n. Then
R
c1(H)c1(L) = n
R
c1(H)c1(N) by additivity. But
R
c1(N)c1(H) > 0 by hypothesis. Hence H2(N ⊗n) vanishes for n ≫0. Now,
χ(N ⊗n) =
R
c1(N)2  n+1
2

+ a1n + a0
for some a1, a0 by Snapper’s Theorem, Theorem B.7. But
R
c1(N)2 > 0 by hy-
pothesis. Therefore, (ii) holds.
□
Corollary B.29. Assume S is the spectrum of a ﬁeld, and X a geometrically
irreducible projective r-fold with r ≥2.
Let D, E be eﬀective divisors, with E
possibly trivial. Assume D is ample. Then D + E is connected.
Proof. Plainly we may assume the ground ﬁeld is algebraically closed and X
is reduced. Fix n > 0 so that nD + E is ample; plainly we may replace D and E
by nD + E and 0. Proceeding by way of contradiction, assume D is the disjoint
union of two closed subschemes D1 and D2. Plainly D1 and D2 are divisors; so
D = D1 + D2.
Proceed by induction on r. Suppose r = 2. Then, since D1 and D2 are disjoint,
(D1·D2) = 0 by Lemma B.13. Now, D is ample. Therefore, Proposition B.14 yields
(D2
1) = (D.D1) > 0 and (D2
2) = (D.D2) > 0.


PDF PAGE 81
THE PICARD SCHEME
81
These conclusions contradict Theorem B.27 with H := OX(D1) and L := OX(D2).
Finally, suppose r ≥3. Let H be a general hyperplane section of X. Then H is
integral by Bertini’s Theorem [Se50, Thm. 12, p. 374]. And H is not a component
of D. Set D′ := D ∩H and D′
i := Di ∩H. Plainly D′
1 and D′
2 are disjoint, and
D′ = D′
1 +D′
2; also, D′ is ample. So induction yields the desired contradiction.
□
References
[AK70] Altman, A. and Kleiman, S. “Introduction to Grothendieck duality theory,” Lecture Notes
in Math. 146, 1970.
[AK74] Altman, A. B., and Kleiman, S. L. Algebraic systems of linearly equivalent divisor-like
subschemes, Compos. Math. 29 (1974), 113–139.
[AK79] Altman, A. B., and Kleiman, S. L. Compactifying the Picard scheme II, Am. J. Math.
101 (1979), 10–41.
[AK80] Altman, A. B., and Kleiman, S. L. Compactifying the Picard scheme, Adv. Math. 35
(1980), 50–112.
[Ar67] Artin, M. Algebraization of formal moduli: I, in “Global Analysis, papers in honor of K.
Kodaira,” Princeton U. Press, 1969, pp. 21–71.
[Ar68] Artin, M. The implicit function theorem in algebraic geometry, in “Algebraic Geometry.
Bombay Colloquium 1968,” Oxford U. Press, 1969 pp. 13–34.
[Bo69] Borel, A. “Linear Algebraic groups,” (notes taken by H. Bass), Benjamin, 1969.
[BLR] Bosch, S., L¨utkebohmert W., and Raynaud, M. “N´eron models,” Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb.,
3.Folge • Band 21, Springer, 1990.
[BCP] Brigaglia A., Ciliberto, C., and Pedrini, C. The Italian school of algebraic geometry and
Abel’s legacy, in “The Legacy of Niels Henrik Abel • The Abel Bicentennial, Oslo 2002,”
Laudal, O. A. and Piene, R. (Eds.), Springer, 2004, pp. 295–347.
[Ca60] Cartier, P. Sur un th´eor`eme de Snapper, Bull. Soc. Math. France, 88 (1960), 333–343.
[Ch57] Chow, W.-L. On the projective embedding of homogeneous varieties, in “Algebrai geometry
and toplogy. A symposium in honor of S. Lefschetz,” Princeton U. Press, 1957.
[CS01] Colmez, P. and Serre, J.-P. Correspondance Grothendieck–Serre, Documents Math. 2, Soc.
Math. France, 2001.
[Co02] Conrad, B. A modern proof of Chevalley’s theorem on algebraic groups, J. Ramanujan
Math. Soc. 17 (2002), 1–18.
[De68] Deligne, P. Th´eor`eme de Lefschetz et crit`eres de d´eg´ener´escence de suites spectrales, Publ.
Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 35 (1968), 259–278.
[De73] Deligne, P. Cohomologie `a supports propres, Expos´e XVII in “SGA 4-3” Lecture Notes in
Math. 305, 1973.
[EGK] Esteves, E., Gagn´e, M., and Kleiman, S. Autoduality of the compactiﬁed Jacobian, J.
London Math. Soc. 65 (2002), 591–610.
[Dix] Giraud, J., et al. “Dix expos´es sur la cohomologie des sch´emas,” (A. Grothendieck and N.
H. Kuiper, eds.), Adv. Stud. Pure Math. 3, North-Holand, 1968.
[Gd58] Godement, R. “Topologie Alg´ebrique et Th´eorie des Faisceaux,” Hermann, 1958.
[FGA] Grothendieck, A. “Fondements de la G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique” [Extraits du S´eminaire Bour-
baki 1957–1962], Secr´etariat math´ematique, 11 rue Pierre Curie, Paris 5e, 1962.
[EGA I] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique I,” Publ. Math.
Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 4, 1960.
[EGA II] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique II,” Publ.
Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 8, 1961.
[EGA III1] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique III-Part 1,”
Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 11, 1961.
[EGA III2] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique III-Part 2,”
Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 17, 1963.


PDF PAGE 82
82
S. L. KLEIMAN
[EGA IV2] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique IV-Part 2,”
Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 24, 1965.
[EGA IV3] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique IV-Part 3,”
Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 28, 1966.
[EGA IV4] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique IV-Part 4,”
Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 32, 1967.
[EGA G] Grothendieck, A. and Dieudonn´e, J. “El´ements de G´eom´etrie Alg´ebrique I,” Grund-
lehren Math. Wiss. 166, Springer, 1971.
[SGA 1] Grothendieck, A. “Revˆetements ´etales et groupe fondamental,” Lecture Notes in Math.
224, 1971.
[SGA 2] Grothendieck, A. “Cohomologie locale des faisceaux coherents et th´eor`ems de Lefschetz
Locaux et Globaux,” North-Holland, 1968.
[Ha83] Hartshorne, R. “Algebraic Geometry,” Grad. Texts in Math. 52, Springer, 1983.
[Ig55] Igusa, J. On some problems in abstract algebraic geometry, Oric. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 41
(1955), 964–967.
[Jo79] Jouanolou, J.-P. “Th´eor`emes de Bertini et applications,” Prog. Math. 42, Birkh¨auser, 1983.
[Kl71] Kleiman, S. Les th´eor`emes de ﬁnitude pour le foncteur de Picard, Expos´e XIII in SGA
6, “Th´eorie des intersections et th´eor`eme de Riemann–Roch,” Lecture Notes in Math. 225
(1971), 616–666.
[Kl73] Kleiman, S. Completeness of the characteristic system, Adv. Math. 11 (1973), 305–310.
[Kl04] Kleiman, S. What is Abel’s theorem anyway? in “The Legacy of Niels Henrik Abel • The
Abel Bicentennial, Oslo 2002,” Laudal, O. A. and Piene, R. (Eds.), Springer 2004, pp. 395–440.
[Kn71] Knutson, D. “Algebraic spaces,” Lecture Notes in Math. 203, 1971.
[LLR] Liu, Q., Lorenzini, D., and Raynaud, M. N´eron models, Lie algebras, and reduction of
curves of genus one, Invent. Math. 157 (2004), 455–518.
[Mm65] Mumford, D. “Geometric invariant theory,” Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. 34, Springer, 1965.
[Mm66] Mumford, D. “Lectures on curves on an algebraic surface,” Ann. Studies 59, Princeton,
1966.
[Mm67] Mumford, D. Pathologies III, Amer. J. Math. 89 (1967), 94–104.
[Mm70] Mumford, D. “Abelian varieties,” Tata Institute Study 5, Oxford, 1970.
[Mr63] Murre, J. P. On the contravariant functors from the catergory of prschemes over a ﬁeld
into the category of Abelian groups, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci. 23 (1967), 5–43.
[Mr65] Murre, J. P. Representation of unramiﬁed functors. Applications. (according to unpub-
lished results of A. Grothendieck), S´em. Bourbaki, 1964/65, no 294.
[Na56] Nagata, M. General theory of algebraic geometry over Dedekind domains, I, Amer. J.
Math., 78 (1956), 78–116.
[OB72] Ogus, A. and Bergman, G. Nakayama’s lemma for half-exact functors, Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc., 31 (1972), 67–74.
[Oo62] Oort, F. Sur le sch´ema de Picard, Bull. Sci. Math., 90 (1962), 1–14.
[Ra66] Raynaud, M. Faisceaux amples sur les sch´emas en groupes et les espaces homog`nes, C. R.
Acad. Sci. Paris, 262 (1966), 1313–1315.
[Ra70] Raynaud, M. “Faisceaux amples sur les sch´emas en groupes et les espaces homog`nes,”
Lecture Notes in Math. 119, 1970.
[Ra71] Raynaud, M. Un th´eor`eme de repr´esentabilit´e relative sur le foncteur de Picard, Expos´e
XII (written up by S. Kleiman) in SGA 6, “Th´eorie des intersections et th´eor`eme de Riemann–
Roch,” Lecture Notes in Math. 225 (1971), 595–615.
[Se37] Segre, B. Intorno ad un teorema di Hodge sulla teoria della base per le curve di una
superﬁcie algebrica, Ann. Mat. Pura Applicata, 16 (1937), 157–163.
[Se50] Seidenberg, A. The hyperplane sections of normal varieties, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 69
(1950), 357–386.
[Sr56] Serre, J.-P. Sur la topologie des vari´et´es alg´ebriques en caract´eristique p, in “Symp. Alg.
Top.,” Mexico, 1956.


PDF PAGE 83
THE PICARD SCHEME
83
[Wa79] Waterhouse, W. C. “Introduction to aﬃne group schemes,” Grad. Texts in Math. 66,
Springer, 1979.
[We54] Weil, A. Sur les crit`eres d’´equivalence en g´eom´etrie alg´ebrique, Math. Ann. 128 (1954),
95–127 (= Coll. Papers, Springer-Verlag, 1979, II, 127–159).
[We79] Weil A. Commentaire. In “Collected Papers.” Springer, 1979: Vol. I, pp. 518–574; Vol. II,
pp. 526–553; and Vol. III, pp. 443–465.
[Za35] Zariski O. “Algebraic Surfaces.” Springer. First edition, Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. Bd.III,
Heft 5 1935. Second supplemented edition, Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb. Bd.61, 1971.
[Za58] Zariski, O. “Introduction to the problem of minimal models in the theory of algebraic
surfaces,” Publ. Math. Soc. Japan 4, 1958 (= Coll. Papers, MIT Press, 1972–73, II, 277–369).
[ZS60] Zariski, O., and Samuel, P. “Commutative Algebra, Vol. II,” Van Nostrand, 1960.
Math Department, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
E-mail address: kleiman@math.mit.edu
