
PDF PAGE 1
p-Kazhdan-Lusztig Theory
Dissertation
zur
Erlangung des Doktorgrades (Dr. rer. nat.)
der
Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakultät
der
Rheinischen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn
vorgelegt von
Lars Thorge Jensen
aus
Essen
Bonn, Oktober 2017


PDF PAGE 2
Angefertigt mit Genehmigung der Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftlichen
Fakultät der Rheinischen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn
1. Gutachter: Prof. Dr. Catharina Stroppel
2. Gutachter: Prof. Dr. Geordie Williamson
Tag der Promotion: 9. Januar 2018
Erscheinungsjahr: 2018


PDF PAGE 3
Abstract
We describe a positive characteristic analogue of the Kazhdan-Lusztig
basis for the Hecke algebra of a crystallographic Coxeter system, called
the p-canonical basis. Using Soergel calculus, we present an algorithm
to calculate this basis.
The p-canonical basis shares strong positivity
properties with the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis (similar to the ones described
by the Kazhdan-Lusztig positivity conjectures), but it loses many of its
combinatorial properties. For this reason, it is much harder to compute
the p-canonical basis which is only known in small examples.
Even without explicit knowledge of the p-canonical basis, one may
obtain a ﬁrst approximate description of the multiplicative structure by
studying the left, right or two-sided cell preorder with respect to the
p-canonical basis. The equivalence classes with respect to these cell pre-
orders lead to the notion of p-cells. Parallel to the very rich theory of
Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in characteristic 0, we try to build a similar theory
in positive characteristic.
The ﬁrst properties of p-cells that we prove are the following: Left and
right p-cells are related by taking inverses, just like for Kazhdan-Lusztig
cells. The set of elements with a ﬁxed left descent set decomposes into
right p-cells. The right p-cells satisfy a similar parabolic compatibility
as Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells. We show that any right p-cell preorder
relation in a ﬁnite, standard parabolic subgroup WI induces right p-cell
preorder relations in each right WI-coset.
In an attempt to explicitly describe p-cells in type A, we study the
consequences of the Kazhdan-Lusztig star-operations for the p-canonical
basis. We deduce many interesting relations for the structure coeﬃcients
of the p-canonical basis and for the base change coeﬃcients between the
p-canonical and the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis. These allow us to show that
the right star-operations preserve the left cell preorder.
Moreover, we
explicitly describe the p-cells in type A via the Robinson-Schensted cor-
respondence and show that they coincide with Kazhdan-Lusztig cells for
all primes p.
A central question is whether Kazhdan-Lusztig cells decompose into
p-cells. Based on the star-operations, we can show that the equivalence
classes with respect to Vogan’s generalized τ-invariant decompose into
left p-cells. Garﬁnkle showed that Vogan’s generalized τ-invariant gives a
complete invariant of Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells in type B and C. From
this, we deduce that Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells in type B and C decompose
into left p-cells for p > 2. We show that in type C3 for p = 2, Kazhdan-
Lusztig right (resp. two-sided) cells do not decompose into right (resp.
two-sided) p-cells. Moreover, we give a criterion that reduces the question
about the decomposition of Kazhdan-Lusztig cells to the minimal elements
with respect to the weak right Bruhat order.
Recently, Achar, Makisumi, Riche and Williamson proved character
formulas for the indecomposable tilting modules of a reductive algebraic
group in terms of the p-canonical basis. This further fuels interest in the
p-canonical basis because the determination of the tilting characters is
a long-standing open problem in modular representation theory. These
new character formulas and the geometric Satake equivalence provide two
connections between right p-cells in aﬃne Weyl groups and tensor ideals of
tilting modules. For this reason, aﬃne Weyl groups of small rank provide
intriguing examples of p-cells.
We explicitly determine the right p-cell
structure in types e
A1, e
A2 and partly in eC2.


PDF PAGE 4


PDF PAGE 5
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Background
11
2.1
Coxeter Systems and Based Root Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
The Hecke Algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Soergel Calculus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Light Leaves and Double Leaves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
The Diagrammatic Category: Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
The p-Canonical Basis
18
3.1
Calculation using Intersection Forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Calculations in the nil Hecke Ring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
First Properties of the p-Canonical Basis . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
General p-Cell Theory
32
4.1
Algebraic Proof of Theorem 4.9 and Corollary 4.10 . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Decomposition Criterion for Kazhdan-Lusztig Cells . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
(Counter-)Examples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
A Conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Left and Right Star Operations
44
5.1
Consequences for p-Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Vogan’s Generalized τ-Invariant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3
p-Cells in Type A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Tilting Modules and Modular Weight Cells
63
6.1
Geometric Realization of the Aﬃne Weyl Group
. . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
More Notation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3
Tilting Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.4
Steinberg Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.5
Translation Functors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.6
Modular Weight Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.7
Fractal-Like Structure of Modular Weight Cells . . . . . . . . . .
72
7
Modular Weight Cells and p-Cells
74
7.1
The p-Canonical Basis of M and Its Categoriﬁcation . . . . . . .
74
7.2
The p-Canonical Basis of N and Its Categoriﬁcation . . . . . . .
75
7.3
Anti-spherical Light Leaves and Soergel’s Hom-Formula . . . . .
77
7.4
The Geometric Satake and the p-Canonical Basis . . . . . . . . .
79
7.5
The Geometric Satake and p-Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.6
Perversity of the p-Canonical Basis in Spherical Cells . . . . . . .
84
8
Open Problems in Modular Representation Theory
85


PDF PAGE 6
CONTENTS
9
Type ˜A1
88
9.1
The p-Canonical Basis in eA1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
9.2
Cell Structure in eA1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
10 Cell Structure in Aﬃne Rank 2
93
10.1 Kazhdan-Lusztig Cells Decompose into p-Cells
. . . . . . . . . .
93
10.2 General Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
10.3 eA2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
10.4 eC2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102


PDF PAGE 7
1
1
Introduction
Categoriﬁcation and Canonical Bases
“Canonical” bases often arise in the process of categoriﬁcation and have many
remarkable applications in representation theory and beyond. Among the ﬁrst
examples are the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis of Hecke algebras and the canonical
basis of quantum groups. In these cases the canonical bases have geometric
origins, encoding the graded dimensions of stalks of intersection cohomology
sheaves on a variety. More recently, considerable progress has been made via
algebraic categoriﬁcations where the canonical basis arises as the character of
a simple or indecomposable projective module over an algebra. For example,
the canonical basis of the quantum group is realized in simply laced type as
the classes in the Grothendieck group of indecomposable projective modules for
KLR algebras (see [VV11]). Similarly, the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis arises as the
classes of indecomposable Soergel bimodules (see [EW14]). In most cases, the
bridge between algebra and geometry is established by realizing the algebra as
an extension algebra of geometric origin [Rou12; VV11; Soe01].
From a representation theoretic point of view, the main interest in canonical
bases stems from the following two points:
• Multiplicities of interest in representation theory in characteristic 0 are
usually encoded by the canonical basis or certain base change coeﬃcients
involving the canonical basis. The famous Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials
give the multiplicities of simple modules in Verma modules of a complex
semi-simple Lie algebra (Kazhdan-Lusztig conjectures, proved in [BK81;
BB81]).
• Based on the hope that the situation in characteristic 0 agrees with the
one in characteristic p ≫0, several open conjectures relate multiplicities
of interest in modular representation theory to canonical bases. Famous
examples include Lusztig’s conjecture for simple rational modules for al-
gebraic groups [Lus80b], the LLT conjecture for representations of Hecke
algebras at roots of unity [LLT96; Ari96], and the James conjecture on
representations of the symmetric group [Jam90].
However, the following way of thinking about problems in modular represen-
tation theory has recently emerged: For each prime number p there should be a
“p-canonical basis” indexed by the same set as the usual canonical basis. Each
p-canonical basis element should coincide with the corresponding canonical ba-
sis element for p ≫0, but may diﬀer from it for small p. This p-canonical basis
(instead of the canonical basis) should provide the correct answer to questions
in representation theory mod p. Examples of this phenomenon include:
(i) The work of Grojnowski, Ariki and others [Gro99; Ari96] identiﬁes the
Grothendieck group of the category of representations of all symmetric
groups with the basic representation of an aﬃne Lie algebra. In this case,
the p-canonical basis is deﬁned via the classes of indecomposable projective
modules, and thus contains deep information in representation theory mod
p essentially by deﬁnition. (We also ﬁrst learnt the term p-canonical basis
from [Gro99].)


PDF PAGE 8
2
1
INTRODUCTION
(ii) The work of Soergel [Soe00] connects certain multiplicities in the rational
representation theory of algebraic groups with indecomposable summands
of Bott-Samelson sheaves. Subsequent work ([JMW14b; WB12]) shows
that Soergel’s results may be restated as giving these multiplicities in
terms of coeﬃcients of the p-canonical basis of the Hecke algebra of the
ﬁnite Weyl group.
(iii) A recent conjecture of Riche and Williamson (see [RW16, Conjecture 5.1])
predicts that the characters of indecomposable tilting modules for reduc-
tive algebraic groups should be given in terms of coeﬃcients of the p-
canonical basis in the anti-spherical module of the aﬃne Weyl group. The
character formulas have recently been proven by Achar, Makisumi, Riche
and Williamson in [Ach+17a; Ach+17b]. Explicit knowledge of the tilt-
ing characters answers several open questions in modular representation
theory. Moreover, this result led to much more eﬃcient algorithms for
tilting characters and a new conjecture about tilting characters for SL3
(see [LW17b]). Current work in progress of Lusztig, Williamson and the
author deals with SP4.
(iv) In recent work by Elias and Losev (see [EL17b]) decomposition numbers
in several modular representation categories are expressed in terms of p-
Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials in type A.
This way of thinking suggests the following strategy to tackle a problem
in modular representation theory: First one should rephrase it in terms of a
p-canonical basis.
Then one should calculate the p-canonical basis.
Usually
the second step is extremely diﬃcult and one should not expect an answer
in general (see for example [Wil17c], which shows that questions of arithmetic
nature, for example whether a particular Fibonacci number is prime, come up in
the calculation in high rank). However, this approach has at least the potential
to unify questions in modular representation theory just like many questions
have answers given by the same Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials. In this thesis,
we focus on combinatorial constraints on the p-canonical basis which make the
situation quite rigid.
The p-Canonical Basis of Hecke algebras
We recall the deﬁnition of and study the p-canonical basis for the Hecke algebra
of a crystallographic Coxeter system (W, S) (see [JW17]). The deﬁnition of the
p-canonical basis for the Hecke algebra appears for the ﬁrst time in [Wil12]. To
motivate its deﬁnition, we ﬁrst recall how the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis arises from
categoriﬁcation. Given a based root datum as input, we get a complex reductive
algebraic group G together with a Borel subgroup B ⊂G and a maximal torus
T ⊂B. The crystallographic Coxeter system (W, S) we consider is either the
ﬁnite Weyl group Wf together with the simple reﬂections Sf given by B or the
aﬃne Weyl group Wf ⋉ZΦ∨together with a suitable set of simple reﬂections
(see Section 6.1). Let us focus on the ﬁnite setting in this section for the sake
of simplicity.
The Hecke algebra H of (Wf, Sf) has two (essentially equivalent) categoriﬁ-
cations, often referred to loosely as the Hecke category:


PDF PAGE 9
3
(i) Geometric: The additive, monoidal (under convolution) category of B-
biequivariant semi-simple complexes on G: the full subcategory of the
equivariant derived category Db
B×B(G, Q) consisting of direct sums of
shifts of equivariant intersection cohomology complexes.
(ii) Algebraic: The monoidal category of Soergel bimodules: a certain full
subcategory of the monoidal category of graded R-bimodules, where R
denotes the regular functions on the Lie algebra of the maximal torus T.
In the ﬁrst setting, the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis arises as the graded dimensions of
stalks of the intersection cohomology complexes (see [KL80]). In the second case,
the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis is realized as the characters of the indecomposable
self-dual Soergel bimodules (see [Soe98; EW14]).
In [EW16] the monoidal category of Soergel bimodules is described by gen-
erators and relations, following earlier work by Elias [Eli16], Elias-Khovanov
[EK10] and Libedinsky [Lib10] (we recall this description in detail below). The
upshot is that there exists a graded monoidal category H, which is deﬁned over
the integers, and whose extension of scalars to Q is equivalent to Soergel bimod-
ules. Hence, one can think of H as an integral form of the Hecke category. For
any ﬁeld k we can consider the extension of scalars kH to k and it is proved in
[EW16] that one has a canonical “character” isomorphism of Z[v, v−1]-algebras
ch : [kH]
∼
−→H
between the split Grothendieck group of kH and the Hecke algebra. Hence, for
any ﬁeld kH provides a categoriﬁcation of the Hecke algebra.1 (Note that while
the coeﬃcients of H change, the Grothendieck group is always the same Hecke
algebra over Z[v, v−1].)
In [EW16] the indecomposable objects of kH are classiﬁed, following So-
ergel’s classiﬁcation of the indecomposable Soergel bimodules in [Soe07].
It
turns out that for all w ∈Wf there exists an indecomposable object kBw ∈kH,
and that any indecomposable object is isomorphic to a grading shift of kBw
for some w ∈Wf.
The p-canonical basis is deﬁned as the character of this
indecomposable object:
pHw := ch(kBw)
where p denotes the characteristic of k.
From basic properties of kH it is
easy to see that {pHw | w ∈Wf} is a basis for the Hecke algebra, which only
depends on the characteristic of k, and that its structure constants are positive
(see Proposition 3.10). Moreover, {0Hw | w ∈W} is the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis,
because QH is equivalent to Soergel bimodules with Q-coeﬃcients (see [EW14]).
Geometric Origin of the p-Canonical Basis
In this subsection we outline the connection between the p-canonical basis and
parity sheaves on (aﬃne) ﬂag varieties. The reader unfamiliar with aﬃne ﬂag
varieties may keep the important case of a (ﬁnite) ﬂag variety in mind.
To any root datum (X, Φ, X∨, Φ∨) with bases ∆⊂Φ and ∆∨⊂Φ∨we can
associate a connected, reductive algebraic group scheme G over Z with Borel
1There is a minor additional technical assumption if the characteristic of k is 2 (see As-
sumption 2.2). We ignore this point in the introduction.


PDF PAGE 10
4
1
INTRODUCTION
subgroup B ⊆G and maximal torus T ⊆B ⊆G. In the ﬁnite case, let X denote
the C-points of the ﬂag variety Fl := G/B with its classical metric topology.
In the aﬃne setting, deﬁne the loop group LG (resp. positive loop group
L+G) of G as the Z-functor given by R 7→G(R((t))) (resp. R 7→G(R[[t]])).
Denote by I the Iwahori subgroup, given by the inverse image of B under the
morphism L+G →G that is induced by t 7→0. In this case, we deﬁne X to be
the C-points of the aﬃne ﬂag variety Fla := LG/I, viewed as ind-variety (see
[Gör10] for more information).
In both settings, we have an (Iwahori)-Bruhat decomposition expressing the
corresponding ﬂag variety as a disjoint union of left B(C) (resp. I(C))-orbits
indexed by the (extended aﬃne) Weyl group. The closure relation is given by
the Bruhat order. Note that the aﬃne ﬂag variety is isomorphic as an ind-variety
to a suitable disjoint union of Kac-Moody ﬂag varieties (see e.g. [Kum02]).
Fix a ﬁeld k of coeﬃcients.
We may consider Db
H(X) the H-equivariant
bounded derived category of k-sheaves where H is either B(C) or I(C) depend-
ing on the setting (see [BL94] for more information about equivariant derived
categories). In [JMW14b, §4.1] Juteau, Mautner and Williamson introduce and
prove the existence of parity sheaves on generalized ﬂag varieties, a class of ob-
jects in Db
H(X) whose stalks satisfy a cohomological parity vanishing condition
(for the constant pariversity function). Their work was motivated by Soergel’s
idea to consider another class of objects as “replacements” for intersection coho-
mology complexes with positive characteristic coeﬃcients (see [Soe00]). Observe
that while X is still a variety (resp. an ind-variety) over C equipped with its
classical topology, the coeﬃcients of the sheaves we are studying may lie in a
ﬁeld of positive characteristic.
The theory of parity sheaves parallels the theory of perverse sheaves in the
following points:
(i) Indecomposable parity sheaves are classiﬁed analogously to simple per-
verse sheaves, being up to isomorphism the unique extension of an irre-
ducible local system on a stratum.
(ii) In our setting, if the coeﬃcients are a ﬁeld of characteristic zero, the
intersection cohomology sheaves are parity sheaves.
But while the decomposition theorem for perverse sheaves fails in positive char-
acteristic, the pushforward along a proper, even, stratiﬁed map preserves parity
sheaves. Moreover, it is possible to calculate the multiplicities of the occurring
indecomposable parity sheaves via intersection forms (see [JMW14b, §3.3.]).
Thus, parity sheaves are particularly interesting in the case of positive charac-
teristic coeﬃcients.
Parity sheaves on various varieties have also been used for categoriﬁcation.
In [Mak15], Maksimau realizes Lusztig’s integral form of the positive half of
the quantum group associated to a Dynkin quiver as a coalgebra geometrically
by considering parity sheaves on quiver moduli spaces. In our setting, parity
sheaves also give canonical bases of the Hecke algebra. If the coeﬃcients are a
ﬁeld of characteristic zero, then the graded dimensions of stalks of parity sheaves
give the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis (as mentioned above, see [KL80; Spr82]). For
a ﬁeld of positive characteristic, the indecomposable parity sheaves realize the
p-canonical basis in this way (see [WB12] in the setting of the ﬂag variety and
[RW16] for the full generality).


PDF PAGE 11
5
From this perspective, several interesting geometric implications arise when
the p-canonical basis diﬀers from the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis. First of all, it
allows one to study the failure of the decomposition theorem in the modu-
lar setting (see [JMW14b, §3]). Secondly, there are close connections between
the decomposition matrix for intersection cohomology complexes and the base
change matrix between the Kazhdan-Lusztig and the p-canonical basis.
In
[AR16, Theorem 2.6] Achar and Riche show that the base change matrix gives
a q-reﬁnement of the decomposition matrix on the Langlands dual ﬂag variety.
Moreover, Williamson proves in [Wil15] that certain base change coeﬃcients and
decomposition numbers coincide. He uses this to give an example of a reducible
characteristic variety in type A. Non-trivial decomposition numbers for an in-
tersection cohomology complex can only occur when the characteristic variety
of the corresponding regular holonomic DX -module is reducible (see [VW13]).
p-Cells
The original motivation for the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis was to explicitly con-
struct representations of the Hecke algebra (see [Lus17]). This naturally led
Kazhdan and Lusztig to study cells in the Hecke algebra with respect to the
Kazhdan-Lusztig basis and the corresponding cell modules.
Recall that the Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell preorder ⩽
L on W can be deﬁned
as follows: x ⩽
L y if and only if there exists an element h ∈H such that 0Hx
occurs with non-trivial coeﬃcient in h 0Hy. The right cell preorder ⩽
R is deﬁned
similarly using right multiplication, whereas the two-sided cell preorder ⩽
2 is
generated by ⩽
L and ⩽
R . Kazhdan-Lusztig left (resp. right or two-sided) cells
are the equivalence classes with respect to ⩽
L (resp. ⩽
R or ⩽
2 ). Note that this
deﬁnition immediately generalizes to the p-canonical basis.
The deﬁnition shows that cells give a rough approximation of the multiplica-
tive structure. For any Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell C ⊆W, write w ⩽
L C (resp.
w <
L C) if there exists an element y ∈C such that w ⩽
L y (and w ̸∈C). Then
the deﬁnition of the Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell preorder allows us to deﬁne left
H-modules
H ⩽
L
C :=
M
w ⩽
L
C
Z[v, v−1] 0Hw and similarly H <
L
C.
Finally, the left cell module associated to C is deﬁned as the left H-module
given by the quotient
H ⩽
L
C/H <
L
C.
In [KL79, Theorem 1.4], Kazhdan and Lusztig show that in type A the cell
modules give the irreducible modules of the Hecke algebra H for generic pa-
rameter v. In their proof, they introduce the Kazhdan-Lusztig star-operations,
generalizing the (dual) Knuth operations for symmetric groups to pairs of sim-
ple reﬂections s and t in a Coxeter group with st of order 3. The study of


PDF PAGE 12
6
1
INTRODUCTION
the consequences of the star-operations for the structure coeﬃcients leads to
an explicit description of the Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in symmetric groups (see
[KL79, §5]).
The Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in type A can be characterized via
the Robinson-Schensted correspondence (see [Ari00]), which gives a bijection
w 7→(P(w), Q(w)) between the symmetric group Sn and pairs of standard
tableaux of the same shape with n boxes: The Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell of a
given element w ∈Sn is given by the set of elements in Sn that have the same
P-symbol as w under the Robinson-Schensted correspondence.
In an attempt to describe p-cells for symmetric groups explicitly, we also
studied the consequences of the Kazhdan-Lusztig star-operations for structure
coeﬃcients as well as base change coeﬃcients between the p-canonical and the
Kazhdan-Lusztig bases. This led to some remarkable identities generalizing the
results in [KL79, §4] and [Lus85, §10.4]. If a p-canonical basis element diﬀers
from the corresponding Kazhdan-Lusztig basis element, then these identities
often allow to deduce the non-triviality of other p-canonical basis elements (see
[LW17b, Remark 5.2. (9)] for an example). Another consequence is that p-
cells coincide with Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in symmetric groups for all primes p
(see Theorem 5.32) and in particular that they are independent of p. This is
particularly interesting since the p-canonical basis does diﬀer from the Kazhdan-
Lusztig basis for many primes p (see [Wil17c]).
Thus, in type A the p-canonical basis of each cell module gives after extend-
ing scalars to C and specializing v to 1 a basis of the corresponding complex
irreducible representation of the symmetric group. Letting p vary, we obtain a
very interesting family of bases that merits further study. The relation between
Specht modules, the Kazhdan-Lusztig cell representations, and their correspond-
ing natural bases was further studied for the Hecke algebra as well as for the
group algebra of symmetric groups in [Mat94; GM88; MP05; MS08].
Supported by the results in ﬁnite type A, one may hope that Kazhdan-
Lusztig cells always decompose into p-cells. Unfortunately, this is not the case
as we show in Section 4.3.3. However, we still believe that the corresponding
statement may still be true for p good for the corresponding algebraic group.
In Section 4.2, we develop a simple criterion when Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells
decompose into right p-cells, which reduces the question to minimal elements
with respect to the weak right Bruhat order in each cell.
In a series of papers [Gar90; Gar92; Gar93; GPM], Garﬁnkle generalizes
the Robinson-Schensted correspondence to types B, C and D.
She devel-
ops combinatorial algorithms to associate to a Weyl group element w a pair
(TL(w), TR(w)) of standard domino tableaux of the same shape from which w
can be reconstructed. (Note that the deﬁnition of a standard domino tableau
depends on the type.) The main diﬀerence to the situation in type A is that the
partition of the Weyl group into sets with the same left domino tableau is ﬁner
than the partition into Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells (see [McG96, §3]). For this
reason, Garﬁnkle groups the set of dominos in a tableau into cycles and classi-
ﬁes them as “open” or “closed”. For each open cycle, she deﬁnes an involutive
algorithm called “moving a tableau through an open cycle” that changes only
the positions of the dominos in the open cycle. Based on this, she deﬁnes an
equivalence relation on the set of standard domino tableaux by declaring two
to be equivalent if one can be obtained from the other by moving through open
cycles. One of the main results is that two elements in a Weyl group of type
B/C lie in the same Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell if and only if their correspond-


PDF PAGE 13
7
ing left standard domino tableaux are equivalent (see [Gar93, Corollary 3.5.6.
and Theorem 3.5.9.]). Garﬁnkle also announced an extension of this result to
type D (see [GPM]) which has not yet appeared in print. Moreover, Garﬁnkle
shows that a generalization of Vogan’s τ-invariant gives a complete invariant for
Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells. Based on our results on the Kazhdan-Lusztig star
operations, we can show that the equivalence classes with respect to this gener-
alized τ-invariant give a reﬁnement of the left p-cells under small assumptions
on p. This implies, that Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells decompose into left p-cells
in ﬁnite types B and C for p > 2.
In Section 4, we prove some general results about p-cells most of which
are generalizations of well-known results for Kazhdan-Lusztig cells. First, we
show that right p-cells give a reﬁnement of the partition of the Weyl group
by left descent set (see Lemma 4.4). Then we study which automorphisms of
the Hecke algebra are well-behaved with respect to the p-canonical basis (see
Proposition 4.7) and show that left and right p-cell preorders are related by
taking inverses (see Lemma 4.6). The most important result of this section is a
certain compatibility of p-cells with parabolic subgroups. We show that a right
p-cell preorder relation in a ﬁnite, standard parabolic subgroup WI induces right
p-cell preorder relations in each right WI-coset (see Theorem 4.9).
Examples of p-Cells
Since p-cell theory is still in its early stages, it is of particular importance to
provide interesting examples. For this reason, we developed extensive Magma
code that allows us to compute p-cells in small ﬁnite type: B2, B3, B4, B5, C3,
C4, C5, D4, D5, G2 and F4. In this thesis, we only included small examples that
are of particular interest in order not to bore the reader with large amounts of
data. Based on our extensive calculations, we have developed some interesting
conjectures about distinguished involutions in right p-cells which might govern
the decomposition behaviour of the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells.
Extremely interesting examples are provided by aﬃne Weyl groups of small
rank. Thus, in the second part of the thesis, we focus on p-cells in aﬃne Weyl
groups. Consider W = Wf ⋉ZΦ∨and add the aﬃne reﬂection to Sf to obtain
a set of simple reﬂections S for W (as described in Section 6.1). Consider the
Hecke algebra H associated to (W, S).
Fix an algebraically closed ﬁeld k of characteristic p > 0 as coeﬃcients. Let
G∨denote the split connected reductive group that is deﬁned over k and Lang-
lands dual to G from previous sections. Assume that G∨is simply-connected.
The category Rep(G∨) of ﬁnite dimensional, algebraic G∨representations over
k forms a highest weight category with Weyl modules as standard and induced
modules as costandard objects. In this setting, the notion of tilting modules
makes sense. The full subcategory Tilt(G∨) of all tilting modules in Rep(G∨)
has many favourable properties. First of all, Tilt(G∨) is a Krull-Schmidt cate-
gory. For every λ ∈X∨
+ there exists an indecomposable tilting module T(λ) and
any indecomposable object in Tilt(G∨) is isomorphic to one of the T(λ). More-
over, Tilt(G∨) is closed under the tensor product. This allows us to transfer
the deﬁnition of cells to this setting, giving modular weight cells as equivalence
classes in X∨
+. Then p-cells in W are closely related to modular weight cells for
G∨. Modular weight cells have been studied mainly by Ostrik (see [Ost97]) and
Andersen (see [And92; And04]).


PDF PAGE 14
8
1
INTRODUCTION
The connection between modular weight cells and p-cells is two-fold, provid-
ing diﬀerent pieces of the puzzle. Let us brieﬂy sketch the relationship between
modular weight cells and p-cells (see Section 7 for more details).
Denote by O := C[[t]] the ring of complex Laurent polynomials. The aﬃne
Grassmannian Gra := LG/L+G carries the structure of an ind-projective ind-
scheme. Firstly, if the characteristic p of k is good for G, G(O)-equivariant
parity sheaves on Gra(C) with coeﬃcients in k are perverse (see [JMW14a;
MR15]). The geometric Satake equivalence (see [MV07]) gives an equivalence
of monoidal categories between G(O)-equivariant perverse sheaves on Gra(C)
with coeﬃcients in k (equipped with a convolution product) and Rep(G∨).
The G(O)-orbits on Gra(C) are in bijection with X∨
+ and for every λ ∈X∨
+
there exists up to isomorphism a unique G(O)-equivariant parity sheaf E(λ)
on Gra(C) that extends the constant sheaf k on the G(O)-orbit corresponding
to λ. Moreover, under the geometric Satake equivalence the indecomposable
tilting module T(λ) corresponds to E(λ).
The action of the extended aﬃne
Hecke algebra W ext = W ⋊Ωon X∨⊗R induces a bijection between X∨
+ and
S
σ∈ΩWf\W/σ(Wf) where the elements of Ωact as automorphisms of the Cox-
eter system (W, S). We call an element in W spherical if it is maximal in a double
coset in Wf\W/W
′
f for some standard parabolic subgroup W
′
f ∼= Wf ⊂W. It
follows that a modular weight cell relation induces a right p-cell relation between
the corresponding spherical elements.
Secondly, the recent Riche-Williamson conjecture (see [RW16]) establishes
another link. Denote by h the Coxeter number of W. Riche and Williamson
conjecture that wall-crossing functors give an action of kH on the principal
block Rep0(G∨) for p = char(k) > h and prove their conjecture for GLn. Let sgn
denote the sign module for the ﬁnite Weyl group Wf. The conjecture implies that
two categoriﬁcations of the anti-spherical ZW-module sgn ⊗ZWfZW, namely a
diagrammatic one obtained from a quotient of kH and the category of tilting
modules in the principal block Tilt0(G∨), are equivalent.
Thus, the tilting
characters for G∨can be expressed using aﬃne p-Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials,
just like the tilting characters for a quantum group at a root of unity are linked
to aﬃne Kazhdan-Lusztig Polynomials (see [Soe97a, Corollary 7.6 and §8] and
[Soe97b, Proposition 3.4 (2)]). Unfortunately, the Riche-Williamson conjecture
is still open in other types, but their character formulas have recently been
proven by Achar, Makisumi, Riche and Williamson using diﬀerent techniques
(see [Ach+17a; Ach+17b]). Denote by fW the set of representatives of cosets
in Wf\W of minimal length. Descent set considerations show that any right
p-cell in W that intersects fW non-trivially is fully contained in it (see [AHR17,
Lemma 5.6]). These right p-cells are called anti-spherical (or canonical in the
terminology of [LX88]). Following along the lines of [Ost97], Achar, Hardesty
and Riche use the new character formulas for tilting modules to show that the
modular weight cells completely determine the anti-spherical p-cells and vice
versa (see [AHR17, Theorem 7.7]).
The most interesting result on modular weight cells for G∨shows that they
exhibit some beautiful fractal-like behaviour (which is partly dictated by the
tilting tensor product theorem from [Don93]). In [And04, Lemma 13] Andersen
shows the following: Deﬁne ρ to be the half sum of all positive coroots, set
Yr := (pr −1)ρ + X∨
+ and X∨
pr := {λ ∈X∨
+ | ⟨λ, α⟩< pr for all simple roots α}.
Then λ ∈Yr can be written uniquely as λ = λr
0 +prλr
1 with λr
0 ∈(pr −1)ρ+X∨
pr
and λr
1 ∈X∨
+.


PDF PAGE 15
1.1
Structure of the Thesis
9
Proposition 1.1. Assume p ⩾2h −2. Let λ, µ ∈Yr. Then λ and µ lie in the
same modular weight cell if and only if λr
1 and µr
1 do.
In Section 6, we ﬁrst recall important results about tilting modules, focussing
on results that we need for Andersen’s proof. We also state some results related
to Steinberg modules, which we expect to be important for the further study of
p-cells. After reviewing what is known about modular weight cells, we explain
Andersen’s proof in detail.
Finally, we try to explicitly determine the p-cell structure in aﬃne Weyl
groups in small rank in Sections 9 and 10 for p > 2h −2. First, we deal with
SL2. This case is special as all tilting characters for SL2 are known and they
also give the full p-canonical basis of the aﬃne Hecke algebra. From this, we can
easily deduce the p-cell structure. Moreover, we observe that the two-sided p-cell
of an element determines the p-valuation of the dimension of the corresponding
indecomposable tilting module.
The situation becomes a lot more complicated in rank 2 where we need to
combine all techniques at our disposal. The general scheme is roughly as fol-
lows: First, we deduce from our decomposition criterion that all right (resp.
two-sided) Kazhdan-Lusztig cells decompose into right (resp. two-sided) p-cells
under our assumptions on p. Using the Kazhdan-Lusztig star-operations we
reduce the number of Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells to decompose. Then we ex-
plicitly determine the decomposition behaviour of the anti-spherical Kazhdan-
Lusztig right cells not contained in the lowest Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell.
This determines the modular weight cells for G∨, using the link between anti-
spherical right p-cells and modular weight cells and their fractal-like behaviour.
Lastly, we try to show that the modular weight cells also govern the decomposi-
tion behaviour of the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells containing a spherical element
under the geometric Satake equivalence. We carry out all steps for type eA2, de-
termine the modular weight cells for type eC2 and hope to deal with type eG2 in
the future.
1.1
Structure of the Thesis
Section 2 We introduce notation and recall important results about the Hecke
algebra and Soergel calculus.
Section 3 After recalling the deﬁnition of the p-canonical basis, we explain
how to calculate it using intersection forms. In Section 3.3 the elementary
properties of the p-canonical basis are stated and proved.
The section
ends with several new and interesting examples of the p-canonical basis.
Section 4 We deﬁne p-cells and prove some of their elementary properties.
The most important results are the compatibility of p-cells with parabolic
subgroups and a criterion for Kazhdan-Lusztig cells to decompose into
p-cells. We also give interesting examples of p-cells and state a conjecture
resulting from extensive computer calculations.
Section 5 We introduce the Kazhdan-Lusztig star operations. Then we study
in detail consequences for base change and structure coeﬃcients of the
p-canonical basis and for p-cells. After introducing Vogan’s generalized τ-
invariant, we show that left p-cells give a reﬁnement of the τ-equivalence


PDF PAGE 16
10
1
INTRODUCTION
classes under small assumptions on p. In the end, we show that p-cells in
ﬁnite type A are given by the Robinson-Schensted correspondence.
Section 6 In this section tilting modules for reductive algebraic groups are
introduced with special emphasis on the Steinberg modules. We also in-
troduce modular weight cells and explain Andersen’s proof showing that
they exhibit a beautiful fractal-like structure.
Section 8 This section aims to illustrate why the p-canonical basis is important
by sketching its connections to some open problems in modular represen-
tation theory.
Section 7 We sketch two existing connections between anti-spherical p-cells
and modular weight cells: The ﬁrst one is based on the new character
formulas for tilting modules in terms of the p-canonical basis of the anti-
spherical module for the Hecke algebra and was established by Achar,
Hardesty and Riche. The second one comes from the geometric Satake
equivalence.
Section 9 The p-canonical basis as well as the p-cell structure in type eA1 are
explained explicitly.
Section 10 We state a general strategy to determine p-cells in aﬃne rank 2
and describe the p-cells explicitly in type eA2 and eC2.
1.2
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisor Geordie Williamson -
his constant support, his inspiring mathematical vision and his enthusiasm were
crucial for the success of my PhD project. I would also like to thank Jens Niklas
Eberhardt from Freiburg and Leonardo Patimo for countless hours of interesting
mathematical discussions (on Skype). Moreover, I am grateful to the Hausdorﬀ
Center and the Max-Planck Institute for mathematics for the ﬁnancial support
for my research visits in Kyoto and Sydney respectively. On a personal note, I
am very thankful to Anne, my family and all my friends, in particular Jonas,
Mario, Tanja and Kathie, for all their emotional support.


PDF PAGE 17
11
2
Background
2.1
Coxeter Systems and Based Root Data
Let S be a ﬁnite set and (ms,t)s,t∈S be a matrix with entries in N ∪{∞} such
that ms,s = 1 and ms,t = mt,s ⩾2 for all s ̸= t ∈S.
Denote by W the
group generated by S subject to the relations (st)ms,t = 1 for s, t ∈S with
ms,t < ∞. We say that (W, S) is a Coxeter system and W is a Coxeter group.
The Coxeter group W comes equipped with a length function l : W →N and
the Bruhat order ⩽(see [Hum90] for more details). A Coxeter system (W, S) is
called crystallographic if ms,t ∈{2, 3, 4, 6, ∞} for all s ̸= t ∈S. We denote the
identity of W by e. For w ∈W we deﬁne its left descent set via
L(w) := {s ∈S | l(sw) < l(w)}.
The right descent set of w is given by R(w) := L(w−1).
Deﬁne an expression to be a ﬁnite sequence of elements in S. We denote by
Ex(S) := {∅} ∪
[
i∈N\{0}
S × · · · × S
|
{z
}
i-times
the set of all expressions in S. For an expression w = (s1, s2, . . . , sn) denote its
length by l(w) = n. For two expressions x and y in S, we write x⌢y for their
concatenation. The multiplication gives a canonical map Ex(S) →W, w 7→w•.
An expression w in S is called reduced if l(w) = l(w•).
For an expression
w = (s1, s2, . . . , sn) in S a subexpression of w is a sequence we = (se1
1 , se2
2 , . . . sen
n )
where ei ∈{0, 1} for all i.
The sequence e = (e1, e2, . . . , ek) is called the
associated 01-sequence. We usually decorate e as follows: For 1 ⩽k ⩽n denote
by w⩽k := (s1, s2, . . . , sk) the ﬁrst k terms and set wk := (w
e⩽k
⩽k )•. Assign to ei
a decoration di ∈{U, D} where U stands for Up and D for Down as follows:
d1 := U and di :=
(
U
if wi−1si > wi−1,
D
if wi−1si < wi−1
for 2 ⩽i ⩽n.
We often write the decorated sequence as (d1e1, d2e2, . . . , dnen). The sequence
of elements e, w1, w2, . . . , wn is called the Bruhat stroll associated to we. The
defect of e is deﬁned to be
df(e) := |{i | diei = U0}| −|{i | diei = D0}|.
The set of subexpressions of w comes equipped with a partial order, called the
path dominance order (see [EW16, §2.4] for the deﬁnition).
Example 2.1. To illustrate the deﬁnitions, consider for example the case S =
{s, t} with ms,t = mt,s = 3 (i.e. type A2). The reduced expression (s, t, s)
admits two decorated 01-sequences expressing s:
(U1, U0, D0)
of defect 0
(U0, U0, U1)
of defect 2


PDF PAGE 18
12
2
BACKGROUND
Recall that given an abstract root datum Ψ = (X, Φ, X∨, Φ∨) and a basis
∆⊆Φ the quadruple Ψ0 = (X, ∆, X∨, ∆∨) is called a based root datum where
∆∨is the set of simple coroots (see [Spr89, §7.4] for the deﬁnition of a root da-
tum). From now on, ﬁx a based root datum Ψ0. The matrix (⟨α∨
s , αt⟩)(s,t)∈S×S
is called the Cartan matrix associated to this based root datum. By the exis-
tence theorem (see [Sga, Exposé XXV, Théorème 1.1]), starting from Ψ0 we get
G, a split connected reductive algebraic group scheme over Z, together with a
Borel subgroup B ⊆G and a maximal torus T ⊆B ⊆G such that the root
datum determined by (G, T) and the basis given by the simple roots whose root
groups are contained in B give the corresponding based root datum Ψ0. For a
coroot α∨∈Φ∨we deﬁne the corresponding reﬂection on X∨via
sα∨λ := λ −⟨λ, α⟩α∨
for all λ ∈X∨.
We denote the ﬁnite Weyl group of Φ by Wf := ⟨sα∨| α∨∈Φ∨⟩and the aﬃne
Weyl group by W := Wf ⋉ZΦ∨(see Section 6.1 for more details). Recall that
W = Wf ⋉ZΦ∨is generated by all the aﬃne reﬂections sα∨,n for α∨∈Φ∨
+ and
n ∈Z. The ﬁnite as well as the aﬃne Weyl group can be realized as Coxeter
groups with the set of simple reﬂections given by Sf := {sα∨| α∨∈∆∨} and
S = {sα∨,0 | α∨∈∆∨} ∪{sα∨
0 ,1} where α0 ∈Φ+ is the highest root.
For Sf the triple (X∨, ∆, ∆∨) gives a (not necessarily symmetric) faithful
realization of the Coxeter system (Wf, Sf) over Z (as deﬁned in the appendix of
[Eli16]). Alternatively, we could have used ZΦ∨instead of X∨as realization (as
in [RW16, §4.2] in the aﬃne setting).
In the aﬃne setting, we deﬁne elements eαs ∈ZΦ and eα∨
s ∈ZΦ∨as follows:
• for s ∈Sf, choose eαs and eα∨
s as the simple root and simple coroot associ-
ated to s respectively;
• if s ∈S \ Sf, then the image of s under the canonical projection W →Wf
is the reﬂection sα∨
0 ; deﬁne eαs and eα∨
s to be −α0 and −α∨
0 respectively.
Then the triple (X∨, {eαs}s∈S, {eα∨
s }s∈S) gives a (not necessarily symmetric) bal-
anced realization of the Coxeter system (W, S) over Z (see [Eli16, Def. A.3]).
Fix a commutative ring k. In both cases, kV := X∨⊗Zk yields a (potentially
non-faithful) realization of the Coxeter system over k. Set kV ∗:= Homk(kV, k)
and note that kV ∗is isomorphic to X ⊗Z k. Throughout, we will assume our
realization to satisfy:
Assumption 2.2 (Demazure Surjectivity). The maps αs : kV →k and α∨
s :
kV ∗→k are surjective for all s ∈S.
This is automatically satisﬁed if 2 is invertible in k or if the Coxeter system
(W, S) is of simply-laced type and of rank |S| ⩾2.
We denote by R = S(kV ∗) the symmetric algebra of kV ∗over k and view
it as a graded ring with kV ∗in degree 2. By choosing X∨instead of X in the
deﬁnition of V , we ensure that R is a polynomial ring in the roots. We may
also canonically identify R with H∗
T (pt; k), the T-equivariant cohomology of a
point (see [Bri98, §1 Example 2)]).
The action of W on kV induces an action on R by functoriality. For any
s ∈S we deﬁne the Demazure operator ∂s : R →R(−2) via
∂s(f) := f −s(f)
αs


PDF PAGE 19
2.2
The Hecke Algebra
13
where (1) denotes the grading shift down by one: Given a graded R-bimodule
B = L
i∈Z Bi, we denote by B(1) the shifted bimodule with B(1)i = Bi+1. Ob-
serve that ∂s is a well-deﬁned graded Rs-bimodule homomorphism (see [EW16,
§3.3] for more details).
2.2
The Hecke Algebra
The Hecke algebra is the free Z[v, v−1]-algebra with {Hw | w ∈W} as basis,
called the standard basis, and multiplication determined by:
H2
s = (v−1 −v)Hs + 1
for all s ∈S,
HxHy = Hxy
if l(x) + l(y) = l(xy).
There is a unique Z-linear involution (−) on H satisfying v = v−1 and
Hx = H−1
x−1. The Kazhdan-Lusztig basis element Hx is the unique element in
Hx +P
y<x vZ[v]Hy that is invariant under (−). This is Soergel’s normalization
from [Soe97b] of a basis introduced originally in [KL79]. For a sequence w =
(s1, s2, . . . , sn) in S, we write Hw for the element Hs1Hs2 . . . Hsn. After ﬁxing
a reduced expression of every element w ∈W, the set {Hw | w ∈W} gives a
basis of H, called the Bott-Samelson basis.
Let ι be the Z[v, v−1]-linear anti-involution on H satisfying ι(Hs) = Hs for
s ∈S and thus ι(Hx) = Hx−1.
2.3
Soergel Calculus
We deﬁne an S-graph to be a ﬁnite, decorated, planar graph with boundary
properly embedded in the planar strip R × [0, 1] whose edges are coloured by S
and all of whose vertices are of the following types:
univalent vertices (“dots”)
of degree 1,
trivalent vertices
of degree −1,
2ms,t-valent vertices
of degree 0,
where we require the 2ms,t-valent vertex to have exactly 2ms,t edges, coloured
alternately by s and t around the vertex.
The regions of an S-graph (i.e. the connected components of the complement
of the graph in R×[0, 1]) may be decorated by homogeneous elements of R. The
degree of a decorated S-graph is deﬁned as the sum of the degrees of its vertices
and of the degrees of the polynomials decorating its regions.
Next, we introduce the diagrammatic category of Soergel bimodules. The
main reference for this is [EW16] (see also [Eli16] in the dihedral case and [EK10]
in type A).
Let BS be the strict monoidal category with Z-graded Hom-spaces which
is monoidally generated by the elements in S.
Thus the objects of BS are


PDF PAGE 20
14
2
BACKGROUND
given by Ex(S) and the monoidal structure on the level of objects is given by
concatenation of sequences in S. For any x, y ∈Ex(S), HomBS(x, y) is deﬁned
to be the free R-module generated by isotopy classes of decorated S-graphs with
bottom boundary x and top boundary y modulo the local relations below. The
composition (resp. tensor product) of two morphisms is given by vertical (resp.
horizontal) concatenation of diagrams.
We now recall the relations deﬁning BS:
2.3.1
One-colour relations
For all s ∈S we have:
• Frobenius Unit:
=
(1)
• Frobenius Associativity:
=
(2)
• Needle Relation:
=
0
(3)
• Barbell Relation:
=
αs
(4)
• Nil Hecke Relation:
f
=
sf
+
∂s(f)
(5)
2.3.2
Two-colour relations
There are two colour relations for all pairs s, t ∈S such that ms,t < ∞(so that
the 2mst-valent vertex is deﬁned).
The ﬁrst two-colour relation is called Two-colour Associativity and describes
what happens when we pull a trivalent vertex through a 2ms,t-valent vertex.
We give it for ms,t ∈{2, 3, 4} and let the reader guess the general form (see
[Eli16, (6.12)]):
=
if ms,t = 2
(type A1 × A1),


PDF PAGE 21
2.4
Light Leaves and Double Leaves
15
=
if ms,t = 3
(type A2),
=
if ms,t = 4
(type B2).
The next two-colour relation is called the Jones-Wenzl Relation and ex-
presses a 2ms,t-valent with a dot on one strand as a linear combination of
diagrams in which only dots and trivalent vertices appear. We state it only for
ms,t ∈{2, 3, 4} and refer the reader to [Eli16] for more detail:
=
if ms,t = 2,
=
+
if ms,t = 3,
=
+
+
−⟨α∨
t , αs⟩
−⟨α∨
s , αt⟩
if ms,t = 4.
2.3.3
Three-colour relations
We do not repeat the deﬁnition of the Zamolodchikov relations or “higher braid
relations” here. The reader can ﬁnd them in [EW16, §1.4.3] and is referred to
[EW17] for more detail on the topological origins of the Zamolodchikov relations.
2.4
Light Leaves and Double Leaves
In this section we brieﬂy discuss how to describe bases for morphism spaces in
BS. Fix an expression w and a reduced expression x. In [EW16, §6.1] it is de-
scribed how one may associate a “light leaves morphism” LLw,e ∈HomBS(w, x)
to each subexpression e of w such that (we)• = x. We will not recall the ex-
plicit construction here, but the reader is encouraged to consult [EW16, §6.1]
to follow our examples. The construction of light leaves follows a construction
of Libedinsky for Soergel bimodules [Lib08] and depends on certain additional
non-canonical choices.


PDF PAGE 22
16
2
BACKGROUND
In the special case of x = e, the identity of W, we get (see [EW16, Proposi-
tion 6.12]):
Proposition 2.3. The set of all light leaves indexed by subsequences e of w
expressing the identity of W gives an R-basis of HomBS(w, ∅).
For an S-graph D denote by D the S-graph obtained by ﬂipping the diagram
upside down. This induces a contravariant equivalence on the monoidal category
BS ﬁxing all objects.
Out of light leaves one can construct double leaves as follows. Let x and y
be arbitrary expressions in S. For any subsequences e (resp. f) of x (resp. y)
both expressing w ∈W deﬁne LLw,e,f := LLy,f ◦LLx,e. The following result
can be found in [EW16, Theorem 6.11] (and was proved earlier in the setting of
Soergel bimodules by Libedinsky in [Lib15]):
Theorem 2.4. The set of all double leaves ranging over all w ∈W and pairs
of subsequences e (resp. f) of x (resp. y) both expressing w gives an R-basis of
HomBS(x, y).
2.5
The Diagrammatic Category: Properties
Note that all relations in BS are homogeneous for our grading on S-graphs and
thus BS is a category enriched in graded left R-modules; multiplying an S-graph
D with a homogeneous polynomial f ∈R from the left is deﬁned by decorating
the leftmost region of D with f.
Let H be the Karoubian envelope of the graded version of the additive
closure of BS, in symbols H = Kar(BS). We call H the diagrammatic category
of Soergel bimodules. In other words, in the passage from BS to H we ﬁrst allow
direct sums and grading shifts (restricting to degree preserving homomorphisms)
and then the taking of direct summands. The following properties can be found
in [EW16, Lemma 6.24, Theorem 6.25 and Corollary 6.26]:
Theorem 2.5 (Properties of H).
Let k be a complete local ring (e.g. a ﬁeld or the p-adic integers Zp).
(i) H is a Krull-Schmidt category.
(ii) For all w ∈W there exists a unique, indecomposable object Bw ∈H which
is a direct summand of w for any reduced expression w of w and which is
not isomorphic to a grading shift of any direct summand of any expression
v for v < w. The object Bw does not depend up to isomorphism on the
reduced expression w of w.
(iii) The set {Bw | w ∈W} gives a complete set of representatives of the
isomorphism classes of indecomposable objects in H up to grading shift.
(iv) There exists a unique isomorphism of Z[v, v−1]-algebras
ch : [H] −→H
sending [Bs] to Hs for all s ∈S, where [H] denotes the split Grothendieck
group of H. (We view [H] as a Z[v, v−1]-algebra as follows: the monoidal
structure on H induces a unital, associative multiplication and v acts via
v[B] := [B(1)] for an object B of H.)


PDF PAGE 23
2.5
The Diagrammatic Category: Properties
17
It should be noted that we do not have a diagrammatic presentation of H
as determining the idempotents in BS is usually extremely diﬃcult.
Observe that (−) extends to a contravariant equivalence of the graded, R-
linear, additive, monoidal category H sending Bw(n) to Bw(−n) for all n ∈Z
and w ∈W.
In order to explicitly give the isomorphism in the last part of Theorem 2.5,
we need to introduce some more notation. For x ∈W, let H≮x be the quotient
category of H by the 2-sided ideal of morphisms factoring through any grading
shift of a reduced expression y for some y < x. Write Hom≮x(−, −) for homo-
morphism spaces in H≮x. In H≮x any two reduced expressions for x become
canonically isomorphic. We denote the image of any reduced expression for x
in H≮x by x as well. Under the assumptions of Theorem 2.5 we can deﬁne the
diagrammatic character on an object B of H as follows:
ch : [H] −→H,
[B] 7−→
X
w∈W
grk Hom•
≮w(B, w)Hw
and extend Z[v, v−1]-linearly. In the last deﬁnition grk denotes the graded rank
of the free R-module of homomorphisms of all degrees
Hom•
≮w(Bx, w) :=
M
n∈Z
Hom≮w(Bx, w(n)).


PDF PAGE 24
18
3
THE P-CANONICAL BASIS
3
The p-Canonical Basis
In this section we recall the deﬁnition of the p-canonical basis of the Hecke
algebra (see [Wil12]) and explain how to calculate it using intersection forms.
Fix a ﬁeld k of characteristic p ⩾0 and the realization kV of (W, S). We use
this realization to deﬁne H.
It is an interesting question what basis of the Hecke algebra the classes of
the self-dual indecomposable objects in H correspond to. The answer is given
for k = R by Soergel’s conjecture which Elias and Williamson proved in [EW14].
Theorem 3.1 (Elias-Williamson 2013).
ch([Bw]) = Hw for all w ∈W.
This illustrates that the basis of self-dual indecomposable objects in H gives
an extremely interesting basis of H for k = R and motivates our deﬁnition of
the p-canonical basis.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Deﬁne pHw = ch([Bw]) for all w ∈W where ch : [H]
∼
=
−→H
is the isomorphism of Z[v, v−1]-algebras introduced earlier, and p denotes the
characteristic of k as above.
Theorem 2.5 implies that {pHw | w ∈W} gives a basis of H, called the
p-canonical basis. As will become clearer later, the p-canonical basis depends
only on the type of the root system chosen and on the characteristic p of the
ﬁeld k.
3.1
Calculation using Intersection Forms
Next, we are going to explain how to use intersection forms to explicitly calculate
the p-canonical basis. In order to calculate pHw we proceed by induction on
l(w). The induction start is given by pHe = He = He. Assume that we have
already calculated pHv for all v < w. Let w be an arbitrary reduced expression
for w. According to Theorem 2.5, we need to decompose w into indecomposable
objects Bx(n) for x ∈W and n ∈Z in H. For this we need local intersection
forms:
Write Hom≮x,k(−, −) for the homomorphism spaces in k ⊗R H≮x where we
kill the action of the unique maximal ideal of all polynomials of positive degree.
Since Hom•
≮x(w, x) is a graded free R-module with basis (see Section 2.4):
{LLw,e | e is a subexpression of w expressing x},
Hom•
≮x,k(w, x) is a graded k-vector space on the same basis.
For an arbitrary expression w in S and x ∈W, consider the k-bilinear Hom-
pairing
Hom•
≮x,k(x, w) × Hom•
≮x,k(w, x) −→End•
≮x,k(x) = k,
(f, g)
7−→g ◦f.
Observe that End•
≮x,k(x) is concentrated in degree 0 and that the duality (−)
on H gives an isomorphism between Hom•
≮x,k(x, w) and Hom•
≮x,k(w, x). This
allows us to deﬁne:


PDF PAGE 25
3.1
Calculation using Intersection Forms
19
Deﬁnition 3.3. The local intersection form of w at x is the k-bilinear pairing
on the graded free k-vector space Hom•
≮x,k(w, x) given by
Iw,x : Hom•
≮x,k(w, x) × Hom•
≮x,k(w, x) −→End≮x,k(x) = k,
(f, g)
7−→g ◦f.
The local intersection form of w at x can be split up into degree pieces
as follows: Since End•
≮x,k(x) is concentrated in degree 0, a homomorphism in
Hom•
≮x,k(w, x(d)) for some d ∈Z can only pair non-trivially with elements of
Hom•
≮x,k(w, x(−d)). The d-th grading piece of the intersection form can thus
be deﬁned as:
Id
w,x : Hom≮x,k(w, x(−d)) × Hom≮x,k(w, x(d)) −→End≮x,k(x(d)) = k
Finally, the graded rank of Iw,x is denoted by nx,w ∈Z⩾0[v, v−1] and deﬁned
as
nx,w :=
X
d∈Z
rk(Id
w,x)vd.
The following lemma illustrates the importance of intersection forms for the
calculation of the p-canonical basis and follows from an argument similar to
[JMW14b, Lemma 3.1]:
Lemma 3.4. The multiplicity of Bx in w in H is given by the graded rank of
Iw,x.
After calculating the graded ranks of all Iw,x for x < w, we can write for
w = s1s2 . . . sn:
Hs1Hs2 . . . Hsn = pHw +
X
x<w
nx,w
pHx.
Remark 3.5. By comparing the intersection forms over Q and k, one may deduce
that one only needs to calculate the graded ranks of Iw,x for those x such that Hx
occurs with a non-trivial coeﬃcient when expressing Hs1Hs2 . . . Hsn in terms
of the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis.
In order to determine pHw we have to invert the matrix (nx,y)x,y⩽w which
is upper triangular with ones on the diagonal in any total order reﬁning the
Bruhat order.
Finally, it should be noted that in practice one calculates the intersection
form once over Z and reduces modulo diﬀerent primes. Moreover, there is a
variant of the algorithm in which one calculates the idempotents of kBx along
the way. For s ∈S with ws < w one then decomposes the object kBwskBs
(instead of w) into indecomposable objects using intersection forms.
Remark 3.6. There are other ways to calculate the p-canonical basis (which,
however, are much more diﬃcult in practice).
(i) If one can describe the geometry of the corresponding Schubert varieties
quite explicitly, one can do calculations using parity sheaves (see [WB12,
appendix]).
(ii) In [FW14] Fiebig and Williamson show that for a ﬁeld k of characteris-
tic p (or more generally a complete local PID), the Braden-MacPherson
algorithm on the Bruhat graph allows one to compute the p-canonical
basis.


PDF PAGE 26
20
3
THE P-CANONICAL BASIS
3.2
Calculations in the nil Hecke Ring
In [HW15] Xuhua He and Williamson reduce the calculation of certain entries
in the intersection form to a simple formula in the nil Hecke ring. Instead of
going into too much detail, we will try to give a survey of these results.
First, recall the deﬁnition of the nil Hecke ring. Let Q be the ﬁeld of fractions
of R. Denote by Q ∗W the smash product. In other words, Q ∗W is the free
left Q-module with basis {δw | w ∈W} and multiplication given by
(fδx)(gδy) = f(xg)δxy
for f, g ∈Q and x, y ∈W. Inside Q ∗W, we consider the elements
Ds = 1
αs
(δe −δs) = (δe + δs) 1
αs
which satisfy the following relations:
D2
s = 0,
Dsf = (sf)Ds + ∂s(f)
for all f ∈Q,
DsDtDs . . .
|
{z
}
ms,t terms
= DtDsDt . . .
|
{z
}
ms,t terms
.
The last relation ensures that for y ∈W and any reduced expression y =
(s1, s2, . . . , sn) of y we get well-deﬁned elements
Dy = Ds1Ds2 . . . Dsn ∈Q ∗W.
The nil Hecke ring NH is the left R-submodule of Q∗W generated by {Dy | v ∈
W}.
Next, we brieﬂy introduce gobbling morphisms. For any expression w =
(s1, s2, . . . , sn) in S, consider the following 01-sequence e with:
ei =
(
1
if wi−1si > wi−1,
0
otherwise,
where at each step wi is deﬁned as in Section 2.1. Note that (we)• is the maximal
element in W expressible as a subexpression of w, and that the decoration of e
consists entirely of U1’s and D0’s. Therefore any choice of light leaf morphism
LLw,e has degree l((we)•) −l(w) and consists only of 2mst-valent and trivalent
vertices. Denote by Gw the image of LLw,e in H≮(we)•. The morphism Gw
is called a gobbling morphism and can be characterized as follows (see [HW15,
Proposition 3.4]):
Proposition 3.7. Let w, e be as above. Any morphism w →(we)• in H≮(we)•
given by diagrams consisting only of 2mst-valent vertices and l(w) −l((we)•)
trivalent vertices is equal to Gw.
From this they deduce the canonicity of any light leaf morphism LLw,f in
H≮(wf )• indexed by a 01-sequence f without D1’s in its decoration.
(This
follows because the morphism is given as the composition of a sequence of dots
on strands corresponding to U0’s followed by a gobbling morphism.)


PDF PAGE 27
3.3
First Properties of the p-Canonical Basis
21
Finally, we come to their formula in the nil Hecke ring for certain entries of
the intersection form. Let e1 and e2 be two subexpressions of w. Assume that
e1 and e2 both express the same element x ∈W (i.e. x = (we1)• = (we2)•)
and that their decorations do not contain any D1. Deﬁne an element of the nil
Hecke ring as the product f(e1, e2) = f1f2 . . . fm where
fi =







αsi
if e1
i = e2
i = U0,
1
if exactly one of e1
i and e2
i is U0,
Dsi
otherwise.
Denote by d(e1, e2) ∈R the coeﬃcient of D(we1)• in f(e1, e2). The main result
is [HW15, Theorem 5.1]:
Theorem 3.8. For e1 and e2 as above, we have
Iw,x(LLw,e1, LLw,e2) = d(e1, e2).
This theorem gives a combinatorial formula for some entries in the intersec-
tion form. Sometimes one is lucky, and it can be used to calculate the complete
intersection form, as we will see in examples below.
3.3
First Properties of the p-Canonical Basis
The goal of this section is to prove elementary properties of the p-canonical basis
and to compare it to the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis. For this we need a p-modular
system. Let O be a complete local ring with residue ﬁeld k of characteristic
p > 0 and quotient ﬁeld K of characteristic 0. Fix the realization OV of (W, S)
and use it to deﬁne H. For x ∈W we will denote by Bx (resp.
kBx or KBx)
the indecomposable object in H (resp. kH := H ⊗O k or KH := H ⊗O K).
The following lemma shows that indecomposable objects in H remain inde-
composable when passing to kH.
Lemma 3.9. We have for all w ∈W: Bw ⊗O k ∼= kBw.
Proof. Assume Bw ⊗O k is not indecomposable in kH. Then there exists a non-
trivial idempotent e ∈EndkH(Bw⊗Ok). Since EndH(Bw) is a ﬁnitely generated
O-module, we can use idempotent lifting techniques for complete local rings (see
[Lam01, Theorem 21.31]) and ﬁnd an idempotent ˜e ∈EndH(Bw) mapping to
e in EndkH(Bw ⊗O k) ∼= EndH(Bw) ⊗O k. Since Bw is indecomposable, this
idempotent has to be trivial, a contradiction.
Some of the following properties can also be found in [WB12] and [Wil15]:
Proposition 3.10. For all x, y ∈W we have:
(i) pHx = pHx, i.e. pHx is self-dual,
(ii) pHx = Hx + P
y<x
phy,xHy with phy,x ∈Z⩾0[v, v−1],
(iii) pHx = Hx + P
y<x
pmy,xHy with self-dual pmy,x ∈Z⩾0[v, v−1],
(iv) ι(pHx) = pHx−1 and thus in particular pmy,x = pmy−1,x−1 as well as
phy,x = phy−1,x−1,


PDF PAGE 28
22
3
THE P-CANONICAL BASIS
(v) pmy,x = 0 unless L(x) ⊆L(y) and R(x) ⊆R(y),
(vi) pHx
pHy = P
z∈W
pµz
x,y
pHz with self-dual pµz
x,y ∈Z⩾0[v, v−1],
(vii) pHx = Hx for p ≫0 (i.e. there are only ﬁnitely many primes for which
pHx ̸= Hx).
Proof.
(i) We proceed by induction on l(x). For small x the statement is
clear as pHe = He and pHs = Hs for all s ∈S and all primes p. Assume
that we have shown that pHy is self-dual for y < x. Choose s ∈L(x)
and set y = sx. The characterization of kBx in Theorem 2.5 implies that
kBx occurs with multiplicity one in kBskBy and that kBx(n) = kBx(−n).
Thus we can write
kBs
kBy = kBx ⊕
M
z<x
n∈Z
(kBz(n))⊕az,n
with ay,n ∈Z⩾0 for all y < x and n ∈Z and all but ﬁnitely many of the
ay,n are zero. Applying the duality (−) to both sides and using that the
left hand side is self-dual yields az,n = az,−n for all z < x and n ∈Z. This
implies
pHs
pHy = pHx +
X
z<x
pµz,y
pHz
where pµz,y = P
n∈Z az,nvn ∈Z⩾0[v, v−1] is self-dual for all z < x. There-
fore the self-duality of the left-hand side and our induction hypothesis
imply the self-duality of pHx.
(ii) The unicity in the characterization of kBx in Theorem 2.5 implies that
it occurs with multiplicity 1 in any reduced expression x of x.
In the
quotient H≮x all other direct summands of x are killed.
Thus we get
grk Hom≮x(Bx, x) = 1. Note that the Laurent polynomials phy,x have
non-negative coeﬃcients as they are given by graded ranks of free R-
modules.
(iii) According to (ii), Hx occurs precisely with coeﬃcient 1 in pHx.
The
self-duality of the Laurent polynomials pmy,x follows from (i) and the
self-duality of the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis. Since Hom•
≮w(Bx, w) is a free
R-module, we get for F ∈{k, K}:
Hom•
≮w(Bx, w) ⊗O F ∼= Hom•
H≮w⊗OF (Bx ⊗O F, w ⊗O F).
This implies in particular using Lemma 3.9:
ch(kBx) = ch(Bx) = ch(Bx ⊗O K).
Thus the pmy,x have non-negative coeﬃcients as they come from decom-
posing Bx⊗OK into indecomposable objects of the form KBx in KH whose
character is given by Hx by Theorem 3.1.
(iv) There is an equivalence on kH viewed as a k-linear category induced by
the horizontal ﬂip of Soergel graphs. It maps (s1, s2, . . . , sm) ∈kH to
(sm, . . . , s2, s1) and thus kBx to kBx−1 for all x ∈W. By slight abuse of


PDF PAGE 29
3.3
First Properties of the p-Canonical Basis
23
notation we will denote this equivalence also by ι. It is easy to see that
ι descends to a well-deﬁned Z[v, v−1]-linear anti-involution on H sending
Hx to Hx−1 as well as pHx to pHx−1 for all x ∈W. From this we deduce
that the corresponding anti-involution on H sends Hs to Hs for s ∈S and
thus Hx to Hx−1 showing that it coincides with ι deﬁned in Section 2.2.
Therefore we have: ch ◦ι = ι◦ch. Expressing pHx in the Kazhdan-Lusztig
(resp. standard) basis and applying ι proves the last two statements after
comparing coeﬃcients.
(v) The statement for left descent sets follows from Lemma 3.11 below and
the fact that the Laurent polynomials pmy,x have non-negative coeﬃcients.
Using (iv) we can reduce the statement about the right descent sets to the
case we have just proven.
(vi) This follows immediately from the analogue of Soergel’s categoriﬁcation
theorem (part (iv) of Theorem 2.5). Indeed, in order to express pHx
pHy
in the p-canonical basis, we need to decompose kBxkBy into indecompos-
able objects in kH and thus the Laurent polynomial pµz
x,y encodes the
graded multiplicity of kBz in this tensor product. Therefore pµz
x,y has
non-negative coeﬃcients. The self-duality of these Laurent polynomials
follows from (i).
(vii) As explained in Section 3.1 we need to calculate the graded rank of ﬁnitely
many local intersection forms in order to calculate pHx. The rank of each
of these intersection forms can only decrease for ﬁnitely many primes. (vii)
now follows.
The multiplication formula from [KL79, (2.3.a) and (2.3.c)]) reads for x ∈W
and s ∈S as follows:
HsHx =



(v + v−1)Hx
if sx < x,
Hsx + P
y<x s.t.
sy<y µ(y, x)Hy
otherwise.
(6)
where µ(y, x) is the coeﬃcient of v in the Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomial 0hy,x.
One remnant of this multiplication formula for the p-canonical basis is the fol-
lowing result:
Lemma 3.11. For x ∈W and s ∈L(x) we have:
pHs
pHx = (v + v−1) pHx.
Proof. Since sx < x, we can write using Proposition 3.10(ii) for ch(kBsx):
ch(kBs
kBsx) = Hs ch(kBsx) = Hx + vHsx +
X
y<x
y̸=sx
hyHy = Hx +
X
y<x
y̸=sx
myHy.
As kBx is a summand of kBskBsx we can apply Proposition 3.10(iii) to deduce
ch(kBx) = Hx +
X
y<x
y̸=sx
pmy,xHy.


PDF PAGE 30
24
3
THE P-CANONICAL BASIS
This implies pmsx,x = 0. Next, we calculate as follows:
pHs
pHx = Hs
pHx
= Hs(Hx +
X
y<x
y̸=sx
pmy,xHy)
∈(v + v−1) pHx +
X
y<x
Z⩾0[v, v−1] pHy
where in the last equality we used (6) and the observation pmsx,x = 0 to deter-
mine the coeﬃcient in front of pHx. After evaluating at v = 1 and acting on
the trivial module we see that no other terms besides (v + v−1) pHx can occur
on the right hand side.
Next, we will try to understand a little better the base change coeﬃcients
between the p-canonical basis and the standard basis and the structure coef-
ﬁcients occurring when multiplying a p-canonical basis element with pHs for
s ∈S. We have the following recursive formula which is not as useful as for the
KL basis as it involves a lot of unknown structure coeﬃcients!
Lemma 3.12. Let x ∈W and s ∈S such that sx < x. Then the following
holds:
phy,x = phsy,sx + vcy phy,sx −
X
y⩽z<x
pµz
s,sx
phy,z
where cy =
(
1
if sy > y,
−1
otherwise.
Proof. Simply rewrite the multiplication pHs
pHsx = P
z⩽x
pµz
s,sx
pHz in terms
of the standard basis and compare coeﬃcients.
Using the results from [RW16, Section 3] and the fact that the parity sheaves
are deﬁned with respect to the constant pariversity, we get the following parity
restriction on the degree of the structure coeﬃcients:
Corollary 3.13. Let x and s be as above. Then we have for all z ∈W:
deg(phz,x) ≡l(x) −l(z)
(mod 2)
deg(pµz
s,sx) ≡l(x) −l(z)
(mod 2)
Lemma 3.14. Let y ⩽x ∈W and s ∈L(x) ∩L(y). Then we have: phsy,x =
v phy,x.
Proof. Simply rewrite pHs
pHx = (v + v−1) pHx (see Lemma 3.11) in terms of
the standard basis and compare coeﬃcients.
In the remainder of the section, we will show that the p-canonical basis is
compatible with restriction to parabolic subgroups via the induced based sub-
root datum. For a subset I ⊆S we have the corresponding parabolic subgroup
WI ⊆W, which may be viewed as a Coxeter system (WI, I), and its Hecke
algebra H(WI,I), which is naturally a Z[v, v−1]-subalgebra of H. In order to
get elements pHI
x, phI
y,x and pmI
y,x for x, y ∈WI, we deﬁne the corresponding


PDF PAGE 31
3.4
Examples
25
diagrammatic category using the realization (kV, {αs}s∈I, {α∨
s }s∈I) in the ﬁnite
setting (or (kV, {eαs}s∈I, {eα∨
s }s∈I) in the aﬃne setting). In this case Demazure
surjectivity is immediate due to our assumption for the original category. This
realization is a scalar extension of the realization of the sub-Cartan matrix
(⟨α∨
s , αt⟩)(s,t)∈I×I over k since we did not change kV .
Lemma 3.15. For x, y ∈WI the following holds:
(i) pHI
x = pHx
(ii) phI
y,x = phy,x
(iii) pmI
y,x = pmy,x
Proof. For the calculation of pHx only the simple reﬂections occurring in a
reduced expression x of x and the corresponding induced sub-Cartan matrix
matter. This follows from the explicit algorithm introduced in Section 3 and
gives (i) which in turn implies (ii) and (iii) using [Lus03, Lemma 9.10 d)].
3.4
Examples
According to the classiﬁcation of root systems and connected semi-simple alge-
braic groups, a Dynkin diagram ﬁxes a semi-simple, adjoint algebraic group G
together with a maximal torus T ⊆G such that the root system determined by
(G, T) corresponds to the given Dynkin diagram. In this section we will only
give the Dynkin diagram and consider the corresponding root datum of this
pair (G, T) together with an arbitrary basis labelled by the nodes of the Dynkin
diagram as input.
3.4.1
Type B2
We label the simple reﬂections as follows:
s
t
That means that the pairing of simple roots and coroots is given as follows:
⟨α∨
s , αt⟩= −2,
⟨α∨
t , αs⟩= −1.
Because the Schubert varieties associated to e, s, t, st, ts and stst are smooth,
we have pHx = Hx for x ∈{e, s, t, st, ts, stst} and all primes p. (This can also
be checked directly.) The remaining two elements are sts and tst. The two
subsequences of (s, t, s) expressing s and corresponding light leaves are:
(U1, U0, D0) of defect 0 ⇝L1 =
,
(U0, U0, U1) of defect 2 ⇝L2 =
.


PDF PAGE 32
26
3
THE P-CANONICAL BASIS
Thus the pairing of the light leaves in H≮s is given by
(Li ◦Lj)i,j∈{1,2} =
 
⟨α∨
s , αt⟩
αt
αt
αsαt
!
where the top left entry comes from the following calculation:
=
αt
=
∂sαt
+ αt
=
∂sαt
Therefore the 0-th degree piece of the local intersection form of (s, t, s) at s is
I0
sts,s = (−2) (recall that ⟨α∨
s , αt⟩= ∂sαt = −2). This shows that if p = 2, then
kBskBtkBs does not decompose as kBsts ⊕kBs, but remains indecomposable.
We get
pHsts =
(
Hsts + Hs
if p = 2,
Hsts
otherwise.
Swapping the roles of s and t, the same calculation yields
pHtst = Htst
for all primes p as ⟨α∨
t , αs⟩= −1.
Observe that in this case the whole local intersection form of (s, t, s) at s
can be calculated using the formula in the nil Hecke ring which we explained in
Section 3.2.
3.4.2
Type G2
We label the simple reﬂections as follows:
s
t
That means that the pairing of simple roots and coroots is given as follows:
⟨α∨
s , αt⟩= −3,
⟨α∨
t , αs⟩= −1.
For all primes p > 3 the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis coincides with the p-canonical
basis. Since the Cartan matrix is symmetric modulo 2, the 2-canonical basis
is stable under swapping s and t. Here is a summary of the results for p ∈{2, 3}:
2Hstst = Hstst + Hst
3Hsts = Hsts + Hs
2Hststs = Hststs + Hs
3Hststs = Hststs + Hsts
2Hx = Hx
for
3Hx = Hx
for


PDF PAGE 33
3.4
Examples
27
x ̸∈{stst, tsts, ststs, tstst}
x ̸∈{sts, ststs}
In this example, all the calculations needed to determine pHx for x /∈
{ststs, tstst} can be carried out using the formula in the nil Hecke ring from
Section 3.2. For (s, t, s, t, s) (resp. (t, s, t, s, t)) there is a subexpression of defect
0 expressing s (resp. t) that contains a D1:
(U1, U1, U0, D1, D0).
We will illustrate how useful the formula in the nil Hecke ring is by calculat-
ing the intersection form of (s, t, s, t) at st. For the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis we
know:
HsHtHsHt = Hstst + 2Hst.
There are two subexpressions of (s, t, s, t) of defect 0 expressing st:
e1 :=(U1, U0, D0, U1)
e2 :=(U1, U1, U0, D0)
We need to calculate the coeﬃcient of Dst in the following elements of the nil
Hecke ring:
d(e1, e1) :
DsαtDsDt = ∂s(αt)Dst
d(e1, e2) :
Ds11Dt = Dst
d(e2, e2) :
DsDtαsDt = ∂t(αs)Dst
Therefore the local intersection form of stst at st is given by
 
−3
1
1
1
!
which implies the result stated above.
3.4.3
Types B3 and C3
In the Dynkin diagrams of types B3 and C3 we label the simple reﬂections as
follows:
B3 :
1
2
3
C3 :
1
2
3
The only interesting case is p = 2. The following table gives an overview
over all the Weyl group elements for which the 2-canonical basis diﬀers from
the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis.
It illustrates the dependence of the 2-canonical
basis on the type of the root system. Even though the combinatorics in types
B3 and C3 are the same, the corresponding 2-canonical bases are quite diﬀerent.


PDF PAGE 34
28
3
THE P-CANONICAL BASIS
B3
C3
2H212
H212
H212 + H2
2H121
H121 + H1
H121
2H3212
H3212
H3212 + H32
2H2123
H2123
H2123 + H23
2H1321
H1321 + H13
H1321
2H1213
H1213 + H13
H1213
2H32123
H32123
H32123 + H232 + H3
2H21232
H21232
H21232 + H232
2H23212
H23212
H23212 + H232
2H21321
H21321 + H213
H21321
2H12132
H12132 + H132
H12132
2H232123
H232123
H232123 + (v + v−1)H232
2H212321
H212321
H212321 + H2321
2H121321
H121321 + H1212 + H1321 + H1213 + H13
H121321
2H123212
H123212
H123212 + H1232
2H2123212
H2123212
H2123212 + H21232 + H23212 + H232
2H1212321
H1212321 + H12123
H1212321
2H1213212
H1213212 + H13212
H1213212
2H21232123
H21232123
H21232123 + H232123
2H12123212
H12123212 + H1212
H12123212
2H12132123
H12132123 + H132123
H12132123
The most interesting entry in the whole table occurs for type C3 and the
element 232123 ∈W where we have
2H232123 = H232123 + (v + v−1)H232
This means that, in the decomposition of B232123 ⊗O K into indecomposable
objects in KH, non-self-dual summands (i.e. with a non-trivial grading shift)
occur.
3.4.4
Type D4
We label the simple reﬂections as follows:
t
s
u
v
It turns out that the p-canonical basis and the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis co-
incide for all primes except for p = 2. There are four elements x ∈W with
2Hx ̸= Hx. If x = suvtsuv then we have
2Ht1xt2 = Ht1xt2 + Ht1suvt2
for t1, t2 ∈⟨t⟩. We will give some more details on how to calculate 2Hx. We
start out by decomposing the corresponding Bott-Samelson object into inde-
composable objects in KH to get
HsHuHvHtHsHuHv = Hx + (v−2 + 3 + v2)Hsuv.


PDF PAGE 35
3.4
Examples
29
As subexpressions of (s, u, v, t, s, u, v) expressing suv we get
(U1, U1, U1, U0, D0, D0, D0)
of defect −2,
(U1, U1, U0, U0, D0, D0, U1)
of defect 0,
(U1, U0, U1, U0, D0, U1, D0)
of defect 0,
(U0, U1, U1, U0, U1, D0, D0)
of defect 0,
(U1, U0, U0, U0, D0, U1, U1)
of defect 2,
(U0, U1, U0, U0, U1, D0, U1)
of defect 2,
(U0, U0, U1, U0, U1, U1, D0)
of defect 2,
(U0, U0, U0, U0, U1, U1, U1)
of defect 4.
The light leaf morphism of degree −2 pairs with the three light leaf mor-
phisms of degree 2 to give the matrix



−1
−1
−1


.
The light leaf morphisms corresponding to the subexpressions of defect 0 are
the following:
Pairing them gives the following degree 0 piece of the intersection form:



0
−1
−1
−1
0
−1
−1
−1
0


.
Note that the determinant of this matrix is −2 and its rank in characteristic 2
is 2. Therefore kBsuvtsuv ⊗O K decomposes as
KBsuvtsuv ⊕KBsuv
giving the result we stated above. The geometry of this example is discussed in
the appendix of [WB12]. Note that all calculations presented in this section can
also be carried out using the formula in the nil Hecke ring (see [HW15, §6.2]).
3.4.5
Type An
According to [WB12], the p-canonical basis and the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis co-
incide for all primes p for n < 7. Thus, we will describe the case n = 7 where
the situation is quite remarkable.
For all primes p ̸= 2 the p-canonical basis and the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis
agree. We have 2Hx ̸= Hx for exactly 38 out of 40320 elements in S8 and these
examples fall into four classes.


PDF PAGE 36
30
3
THE P-CANONICAL BASIS
In the following we will denote for a subset I ⊆S the corresponding parabolic
subgroup by WI = ⟨s ∈I⟩⊆W. If WI is ﬁnite, its longest element will be de-
noted by wI. A permutation φ ∈S8 will be displayed as a string φ(1)φ(2) . . . φ(8).
The Kashiwara-Saito singularity ([KS97]): This corresponds to the permu-
tation w = 62845173. We have
2Hw = Hw + HwI
with I = {1, 3, 4, 5, 7}. There is a cluster of 16 elements around the Kashiwara-
Saito singularity described as follows. If we let J = {2, 6}, then we have
2Huwv = Huwv + HuwIv.
for all u, v ∈WJ unless u = v = wJ in which case
2HwJwwJ = HwJwwJ + HwJwIwJ + HwK
where K = {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7}.
The Hexagon singularity (Braden’s example in the appendix of [WB12]):
Consider the permutation w = 46718235. We have
2Hw = Hw + HwI
with I = {2, 3, 5, 6}. In this case we get a cluster of size 4. For any u, v ∈⟨s4⟩
we have
2Huwv = Huwv + HuwIv
unless u = v = s4 in which case
2Hs4ws4 = Hs4ws4 + Hs4wIs4 + HwK
where K = {1, 3, 4, 5, 7}.
For the Kashiwara-Saito singularity and the Hexagon singularity the calcu-
lation of the the local intersection form of w at wI using the formula in the nil
Hecke ring can be found in [HW15, §6.1 and §6.2]. In both cases one can ﬁnd
w, a reduced expression for w, such that this local intersection form is a 1 × 1
matrix.
The waterfall: Consider the permutation w1 = 67283415. Then we have
2Hw1u = Hw1u + HwIu.
for I = {1, 2, 4, 5, 6} and wJ ̸= u ∈WJ with J = {3, 7}.
Similarly, if we let w2 = 57813462, then we have
2Hvw2 = Hvw2 + Hvw′
I
where I′ = {2, 3, 4, 6, 7} and wJ′ ̸= v ∈WJ with J = {1, 5}.
The situation becomes more complicated due to the fact that for u = wJ
and v = wJ′ we have w1u = vw2 =: w. In this case we get
2Hw = Hw + HwIu + Hvw′
I.
Note that, unlike the Kashiwara-Saito and hexagon permutations discussed
above, the clusters containing w1 and w2 are neither swapped nor ﬁxed by the


PDF PAGE 37
3.4
Examples
31
automorphism si 7→s8−i and thus by applying the graph automorphism one
obtains another seven elements for which 2Hx ̸= Hx. Hence the two “waterfall”
clusters contain 14 elements in total.
The basket: Consider the permutation
w = 84627351.
Then for all u, v ∈⟨s4⟩one has
2Huwv = Huwv + HuwIv
where I = {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7}.


PDF PAGE 38
32
4
GENERAL P-CELL THEORY
4
General p-Cell Theory
In this section, we want to give the deﬁnition of p-cells. This notion is an obvious
generalization of a notion introduced by Kazhdan-Lusztig in [KL79].
Deﬁnition 4.1. For h ∈H we say that pHw appears with non-zero coeﬃcient
in h if the coeﬃcient of pHw is non-zero when expressing h in the p-canonical
basis.
Deﬁne a preorder
p
⩽
R (resp.
p
⩽
L ) on W as follows: x
p
⩽
R y (resp x
p
⩽
L y) if and
only if pHx appears with non-zero coeﬃcient in pHyh (resp. h pHy) for some
h ∈H. Deﬁne
p
⩽
2 to be the preorder generated by
p
⩽
R and
p
⩽
L , in other words
we have: x
p
⩽
2 y if and only if pHx appears with non-zero coeﬃcient in h pHyh′
for some h, h′ ∈H.
For any set of generators of H as a Z[v, v−1]-algebra, it is easy to see that
one gets a set of generating relations for the corresponding p-cell preorders (see
[Wil03, Proposition 4.1.1]). The following deﬁnition introduces some notation
for the relations generating the p-cell preorder obtained from the generating set
{Hs | s ∈S} which we will use in Section 5.1.
Deﬁnition 4.2. Let x, y ∈W. We write x
p←
L y (resp. x
p←
R y) if pµx
s,y (resp.
pµx
y,s) is non-zero for some s ∈S. In addition, we write x
p←
2
y if x
p←
L y or
x
p←
R y holds.
For the sake of completeness, we will state explicitly that these elementary
relations generate the p-cell-preorder (see [AHR17, Lemma 5.3] for a proof):
Lemma 4.3. For x, y ∈W the following holds: x
p
⩽
R y if and only if there
exists a chain x = x0
p←
R x1
p←
R . . .
p←
R xk = y. Similarly for the left (resp.
two-sided) p-cell preorder.
In the remainder of the section, we will prove some elementary properties of
p-cells. In most cases we will focus on right p-cells and not state the version for
left p-cells explicitly.
In [KL79, Proposition 2.4] Kazhdan-Lusztig observed that a Kazhdan-Lusztig
right cell preorder relation implies an inclusion of left descent sets. The follow-
ing result shows that the compatibility between cells and descent sets carries
over to the more general setting. More precisely, the set of all elements with a
ﬁxed left descent set is a union of right p-cells. The result can also be found in
[AHR17, Lemma 5.4]:
Lemma 4.4. For x, y ∈W with y
p
⩽
R x we have L(x) ⊆L(y). In particular,
x
p∼
R y gives L(x) = L(y) and for any I ⊆S the set {w ∈W | L(w) = I} is a
union of right p-cells.


PDF PAGE 39
33
Proof. It is enough to consider the case where we multiply pHx with pHs for
s /∈R(x). We have on the one hand:
pHx
pHs =
X
y
pµy
x,s
pHy
On the other hand we can write:
pHx
pHs = (
X
y⩽x
pmy,xHy)Hs
=
X
y⩽x
s∈R(y)
(v + v−1) pmy,xHy +
X
y⩽x
s̸∈R(y)
pmy,x(Hys +
X
z⩽y
s∈R(z)
µ(z, y)Hz)
Proposition 3.10(v) shows that all y ∈W occurring with non-zero pmy,x on the
right hand side satisfy L(x) ⊆L(y). [KL79, Proposition 2.4] shows that z
0
⩽
R y
implies L(y) ⊆L(z). Observe that the set of y ∈W with non-zero structure
coeﬃcient pµy
x,s is a subset of the set of all y ∈W indexing a summand Hy
with non-zero coeﬃcient on the right hand side (due to Proposition 3.10(iii)
and (vi)). Putting all of this together gives the result.
Corollary 4.5. {Id} is a left, right, and 2-sided p-cell for all primes p.
It is well known for Kazhdan-Lusztig cells that left and right cells are closely
related via taking inverses. Using the Z[v, v−1]-linear anti-involution ι on H
together with Proposition 3.10(iv) we obtain the corresponding result for p-cells
which will allow us to pass from left to right p-cells:
Lemma 4.6. For all x, y ∈W we have:
x
p
⩽
L y ⇐⇒x−1
p
⩽
R y−1,
x
p
⩽
LR y ⇐⇒x−1
p
⩽
LR y−1.
Next, we want to consider the question which automorphisms of our Coxeter
system induce automorphisms on H that are well-behaved with respect to the
p-canonical basis. Choose a total order on S to deﬁne the (generalized) Cartan
matrix M = (⟨α∨
s , αt⟩)(s,t)∈S×S. Let φ : (W, S)
∼
−→(W, S) be an automor-
phism of Coxeter systems (in particular we have φ(S) = S) which leaves M
invariant when permuting simultaneously the corresponding rows and columns
(i.e. ⟨α∨
t , αs⟩= ⟨α∨
φ(t), αφ(s)⟩for all s, t ∈S). Then φ induces a Z[v, v−1]-linear
automorphism of H via Hx 7→Hφ(x) for x ∈W which we will also denote by
φ by slight abuse of notation. Therefore, φ maps Hx to Hφ(x) by the deﬁning
property of the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis.
Proposition 4.7. In the setting given above we have for all x, y ∈W:
(i) φ(pHx) = pHφ(x),
(ii) pmy,x = pmφ(y),φ(x) and phx,y = phφ(x),φ(y),
(iii) pµz
x,y = pµφ(z)
φ(x),φ(y),


PDF PAGE 40
34
4
GENERAL P-CELL THEORY
(iv) x
p
⩽
L y ⇔φ(x)
p
⩽
L φ(y) and x
p
⩽
R y ⇔φ(x)
p
⩽
R φ(y).
Proof. Observe that φ induces a monoidal, k-linear equivalence of BS and thus
of H which on the Hom-spaces merely permutes the colours in the diagrams
(given by S) and the variables of the polynomials in R decorating the regions
according to the action of φ. Since the numerical input for the algorithm to
calculate the p-canonical basis (as described in Section 3) reduces to M we see
immediately that this equivalence sends kBx to kBφ(x) and thus on the level of
Grothendieck groups pHx to pHφ(x). This proves (i).
Recall that φ maps Hx to Hφ(x) and Hx to Hφ(x) for all x ∈W.
For
this reason, (ii) follows from (i) by rewriting pHx in the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis
(resp. standard basis), applying φ, using (i) and comparing coeﬃcients in the
Kazhdan-Lusztig basis (resp. standard basis). (i) implies (iii) in a similar way
and (iv) follows from (iii).
Suppose that our based root datum is irreducible.
In this case, the last
proposition can be applied to all automorphisms of the (extended) Dynkin di-
agram of our root system. In ﬁnite type conjugation by the longest element
in the ﬁnite Weyl group is also covered by the last proposition. Indeed, it fol-
lows from [Dav08, Remark 13.1.8] that for irreducible ﬁnite Coxeter groups the
longest element w0 is central except in types An for n ⩾2, Dn with n odd, E6,
and I2(m) for m odd where I2(m) denotes the dihedral group of order 2m. In
all these cases, conjugation by w0 gives the obvious automorphism of the corre-
sponding Coxeter graph. After restricting to crystallographic Coxeter systems,
only simply-laced types remain and so any automorphism of the Coxeter graph
gives an automorphism of the Dynkin diagram of the same type in the obvious
way (as the graphs are isomorphic).
Deﬁnition 4.8. Let I ⊆S be a subset. Call I ﬁnitary if the corresponding
parabolic subgroup ⟨I⟩⊆W is ﬁnite. Deﬁne W I to be the set of representatives
of minimal length of cosets in W/WI.
The following result is the main result of this section and generalizes the
parabolic compatibility for Kazhdan-Lusztig cells (see [Lus03, Proposition 9.11])
to the setting of p-cells:
Theorem 4.9 (Parabolic compatibility of right p-cells).
Let I ⊆S be a ﬁnitary subset. Then for y, z ∈WI the following holds:
z
p
⩽
R y in WI ⇔∀x ∈W I : xz
p
⩽
R xy in W
As a corollary to the proof of Theorem 4.9 we get:
Corollary 4.10. In the setting of Theorem 4.9 we have:
phxy,xz = phy,z
4.1
Algebraic Proof of Theorem 4.9 and Corollary 4.10
First we will prove Theorem 4.9:


PDF PAGE 41
4.1
Algebraic Proof of Theorem 4.9 and Corollary 4.10
35
For all elements w in WI ∪W I choose a reduced expression w. We have a
bijection
W I × WI −→W
(x, y) 7−→xy
such that l(xy) = l(x) + l(y) (see [BB05, Proposition 2.4.4]). Therefore, for
x ∈W I and y ∈WI the concatenation of the corresponding reduced expressions
x and y gives a reduced expression x⌢y of xy. Choose x ∈W I and y ∈WI
arbitrarily.
Lemma 4.11. We have a decoration- and defect-preserving bijection:
g : {subexpr. of y expressing z}
∼
−→{subexpr. of xy expressing xz}
e
7−→
(1, . . . , 1)
|
{z
}
l(x) ones
⌢e
Proof. It is easy to see that g is well-deﬁned and injective. Leaving out any
letter of x in a subexpression of xy leads to a Bruhat stroll ending in a right
coset exWI with ex < x as x is of minimal length in xWI. Thus, g is surjective.
For the deﬁnition of the Bruhat graph we refer the reader to [Dye91, Deﬁni-
tion 1.1]. The induced Bruhat graph on xWI (as a subgraph of the Bruhat graph
of W) is isomorphic to the one of WI (see [Dye91, Theorem 1.4]). This follows
for example from the subword property (see [BB05, Theorem 2.2.2]). Thus any
subexpression g(e) of xy expressing xz will have a decoration starting with l(x)
symbols U1 (as x is a reduced expression) and the remaining expression e will
be decorated in the same way as e would be decorated as a subexpression of y
expressing z. Since the ones in a subexpression do not contribute to the defect,
this immediately implies:
df(g(e)) = df(e)
where on the left (resp. right) hand side the defect is calculated as a subexpres-
sion of xy (resp. y).
This bijection matches up the combinatorial data used to deﬁne the light
leaves and thus allows us to compare the corresponding local intersection forms.
Consider the local intersection forms Ixy,xz of xy at xz (resp. Iy,z of y at z)
and the matrices representing them with respect to the light leaves bases (see
Section 3). For two subexpressions e, f of y expressing z we get in kH≮xz ⊗R k:
(Ixy,xz)g(e),g(f) = IdBS(x)(Iy,z)e,f
This implies that the multiplicity of kBxz and its grading shifts in BS(xy) which
is given by grk(Ixy,xz) coincides with the multiplicity of kBz and its grading
shifts in BS(y) which is given by grk(Iy,z).
Choose any total order on W reﬁning the Bruhat order and preserving ele-
ments in the same coset in W/WI as blocks of adjacent elements. Note that our
choices above have ﬁxed a reduced expression w for any element w ∈W. Denote
by A the base change matrix from the Bott-Samelson basis {Hw | w ∈WI} to
the p-canonical basis {pHw | w ∈WI} of H(WI,I). A is an upper-triangular,
invertible matrix with entries in Z[v, v−1] and ones on the diagonal. The above


PDF PAGE 42
36
4
GENERAL P-CELL THEORY
considerations show that the base change matrix from the Bott-Samelson to the
p-canonical basis of H looks as follows:







WI
. . .
xWI
. . .
WI
A
...
...
∗
xWI
A
...
0
...







Note that this form is preserved by taking inverses. This means that when
expressing pHxy in terms of the Bott-Samelson basis A−1 gives all coeﬃcients
for terms indexed by xz for z ∈WI. Using this allows us to partly decouple
the terms Hx and Hy. When calculating pHxy
pHw for w ∈WI we can simply
express both terms in the Bott-Samelson basis, perform the calculation where
only the structure coeﬃcients for the Bott-Samelson basis of H(WI,I) come into
play and rewrite it in terms of the p-canonical basis. This immediately implies
the following result as we have full control over the situation in the top coset
xWI:
Corollary 4.12. For all y, z, w ∈WI and a minimal coset representative x of
W/WI we have:
pµxz
xy,w = pµz
y,w
The last corollary proves Theorem 4.9 since elementary relations obtained
from pHw
pHs for w ∈WI and s ∈I generate the right p-cell preorder in WI.
Next, we will prove Corollary 4.10:
Recall the following lemma which in the case of a reduced expression w
describes how to express the Bott-Samelson basis element Hw in terms of the
standard basis (see [EW16, Lemma 2.10]):
Lemma 4.13. For any expression w in S we have:
Hw =
X
e subexpression
of w
vdf(e)H(we)•
Recall that we have chosen a total order on W in the proof of Theorem 4.9.
Denote by B the base change matrix from the Bott-Samelson basis {Hw | w ∈
WI} to the standard basis {Hw | w ∈WI} of H(WI,I). Then B is an upper-
triangular, invertible matrix with entries in Z[v, v−1] and ones on the diagonal.
The defect-preserving bijection from Lemma 4.11 shows that the base change
matrix from the Bott-Samelson to the standard basis of H looks as follows:







WI
. . .
xWI
. . .
WI
B
...
...
∗
xWI
B
...
0
...







Multiplying the base change matrix from the p-canonical to the Bott-Samelson
basis with the base change matrix from the Bott-Samelson to the standard basis
ﬁnishes the proof of Corollary 4.10.


PDF PAGE 43
4.2
Decomposition Criterion for Kazhdan-Lusztig Cells
37
4.2
Decomposition Criterion for Kazhdan-Lusztig Cells
In this section, we want to study the interplay between the weak right Bruhat or-
der (see [BB05, Deﬁnition 3.1.1] for the deﬁnition) and the right p-cell preorder.
This will allow us to formulate a simple criterion as to when p-cells decompose
into Kazhdan-Lusztig cells. This criterion will be quite useful in aﬃne rank 2.
In the next few results we will focus on right cells, but a similar version for
left cells can easily be formulated. For x ∈W, let x = s1s2 . . . sk be a reduced
expression. Set xi := s1s2 . . . si for all 0 ⩽i ⩽k. Since pHe = He there exists a
maximal 0 ⩽m ⩽k such that for all y ⩽xm with pmy,xm ̸= 0 we have y
0
⩽
R xm.
In this setting we have the following result:
Lemma 4.14. All y ⩽x with pmy,x non-zero satisfy: y
0
⩽
R xm.
Proof. The claim follows as pHxl for l ⩾m is a linear combination of Kazhdan-
Lusztig basis elements indexed by elements in {w ∈W | w
0
⩽
R xm}.
Observe that xm
p
⩾
R x always holds. So if xm
p
⩽
R x, then x and xm lie in the
same Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell.
Corollary 4.15. If xm and x lie in the same Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell, then
for y ⩽x with pmy,x non-zero we have y
0
⩽
R x.
Deﬁnition 4.16. Let C ⊆W be an arbitrary subset. C is called right-connected
if for every two elements x, y ∈C, there exists a sequence x = x0, x1, . . . , xk = y
in C such that x−1
i xi−1 ∈S (i.e. xi−1 and xi diﬀer by a simple reﬂection on
the right) for all 1 ⩽i ⩽k. It follows that C decomposes as a disjoint union of
its right-connected components, i.e. the maximal right-connected subsets.
Call an element x ∈C right-minimal if x cannot be reached from any other
element y ∈C \ {x} via a sequence y = x0, x1, . . . , xk = x in C as above
satisfying in addition y < x1 < x2 < · · · < xk = x. Observe that an element is
right-minimal if and only if it is minimal with respect to the weak right Bruhat
order.
Similarly we deﬁne left-connected and left-minimal using multiplication by
simple reﬂections on the left, as well as 2-connected and 2-minimal.
The following observation follows immediately from the deﬁnition of a right-
minimal element, but shows their most important property:
Lemma 4.17. Let C ⊆W be an arbitrary subset. For all y ∈C there exists a
right-minimal element x ∈C such that y
0
⩽
R x and y
p
⩽
R x.
At this point we should mention the following conjecture by Lusztig which he
originally formulated for (aﬃne) Weyl groups in [HK83, p. 14]. It still appears
to be open in ﬁnite type Dn and in general aﬃne type:
Conjecture 4.18.
Every Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell in a Coxeter group is right-connected.


PDF PAGE 44
38
4
GENERAL P-CELL THEORY
In ﬁnite type, the conjecture is known to hold for all dihedral groups, in type
An (see [KL79, §5]), Bn (see [Gar93, Theorem 3.5.9]) and in all exceptional types
H3, H4, F4, E6, E7 and E8 (see [GH15, Example 7.3]). In aﬃne type, it has
been veriﬁed in aﬃne rank 2 (see [Lus85, Theorem 11.3]), for W of type eAn with
n ⩾1 (see [Shi86, Theorem 18.2.1]), for Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells contained
in the lowest Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell (see [Shi88, Corollary 1.2]), for
Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells contained in the Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell
of elements with a unique reduced expression (see [Lus83b, Proposition 3.8])
and some other special cases (see for example [Xi89], [Shi02, Theorem 4.8] and
[Shi06]).
In the rest of the section we want to apply these notions to compare Kazhdan-
Lusztig and p-cells by looking at minimal elements.
We will focus on right
cells even though there are similar results about left (resp. two-sided) cells.
Corollary 4.15 implies the following result:
Corollary 4.19. Let C be a Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell and Cmin the set of
right-minimal elements in C. Assume for all x ∈Cmin and y ⩽x the following:
pmy,x ̸= 0 ⇒y
0
⩽
R x
Then for all x ∈C and y ⩽x with pmy,x ̸= 0 we have y
0
⩽
R x.
Deﬁnition 4.20. Let X be a set equipped with a preorder ⩽. A subset Y ⊆X
is called a lower set if for y ∈Y and any x ∈X with x ⩽y we have x ∈Y as
well.
Observe that any lower set in the right p-cell preorder can be written as a
union of right p-cells. For this reason the following result is the starting point
of our criterion:
Lemma 4.21. Let C be a Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell that satisﬁes the assump-
tions of Corollary 4.19 and x ∈C.
Then y
p
⩽
R x implies y
0
⩽
R x.
If C is
minimal in the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell preorder, then C is a lower set in the
right p-cell preorder and we have
M
x∈C
Z[v, v−1] pHx =
M
x∈C
Z[v, v−1]Hx
as Z[v, v−1]-submodules of H.
Proof. Assume that pHy occurs with non-zero coeﬃcient in pHxh for some
h ∈H.
Write pHxh = (Hx + P
z<x
pmz,xHz)h.
If Hy occurs with non-
zero coeﬃcient in the product Hxh then we have by deﬁnition y
0
⩽
R x. If Hy
occurs with non-zero coeﬃcient in one of the products pmz,xHzh, then we have
pmz,x ̸= 0 and by Corollary 4.19 that y
0
⩽
R z
0
⩽
R x.
Denote by Cmin the set of right-minimal elements in C.
Our arguments
above show that we have the following inclusions:
{
p
⩽
R C} =
[
x∈Cmin
{
p
⩽
R x} ⊆
[
x∈Cmin
{
0
⩽
R x} = {
0
⩽
R C}


PDF PAGE 45
4.2
Decomposition Criterion for Kazhdan-Lusztig Cells
39
The equalities on the left and right hand side follow from Lemma 4.17.
In
particular, C is contained in the left hand side. Thus, if C is minimal in the
Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell preorder, we actually have equality which implies the
claim as the left hand side obviously is a lower set in the p-cell preorder. In this
case, Corollary 4.19 shows that for any x ∈C the p-canonical basis element pHx
can be written in terms of Kazhdan-Lusztig basis elements indexed by elements
in C which implies the statement about the span of the p-canonical and the
Kazhdan-Lusztig basis elements.
Lemma 4.22. Let C be a Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell. Assume that all Kazhdan-
Lusztig right cells smaller or equal than C in the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell
preorder satisfy the assumption of Corollary 4.19. Then {
0
⩽
R C} is a lower set
in the right p-cell preorder and we have
M
x∈{
p
⩽
R
C}
Z[v, v−1] pHx =
M
x∈{
0
⩽
R
C}
Z[v, v−1]Hx
as Z[v, v−1]-submodules of H.
Moreover, C decomposes as a union of right
p-cells.
Proof. We proceed by induction on the height of C in the Kazhdan-Lusztig right
cell preorder. Note that [Lus87, Theorem 2.2 (a)] implies that any aﬃne Weyl
group has only ﬁnitely many Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells. Thus the height of
any cell in the right cell preorder is ﬁnite.
Lemma 4.21 gives the induction start. Let C be of height ⩾2. By induction
for all predecessors of C in the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell preorder we know our
claim holds for {
0<
R C}. Therefore, we may pass to the quotient
H/
M
x∈{
0
<
R
C}
Z[v, v−1]Hx
where C becomes the smallest cell. Note that this quotient is a right H-module
that is free as a Z[v, v−1]-module and admits a p-canonical as well as a Kazhdan-
Lusztig basis. Denote by
π : H →H/
M
x∈{
0
<
R
C}
Z[v, v−1]Hx
the projection to the quotient.
Applying π amounts to forgetting all basis
elements indexed by elements in {
0<
R C} when expressing an element in the
Hecke algebra in the p-canonical or Kazhdan-Lusztig basis. For this reason,
the action of H on this right module captures a lot of information about the
p-cell as well as the Kazhdan-Lusztig cell structure in the following sense: For
x, y ∈{
0
̸<
R
C} we have y
p
⩽
R x if and only if there exists an element h ∈H such
that π(pHy) occurs with non-trivial coeﬃcient in π(pHx)h. A similar statement
holds for the Kazhdan-Lusztig cell structure. This allows us to conclude as in
the proof of Lemma 4.21.


PDF PAGE 46
40
4
GENERAL P-CELL THEORY
4.3
(Counter-)Examples
In this section, we will give some examples of the p-cell structure of ﬁnite Weyl
groups.
We will follow the conventions and notation of Section 3.4, but re-
strict to those examples that give counterexamples to obvious generalizations
of known results from Kazhdan-Lusztig cell theory. All results in this section
were obtained using computer calculations. Denote by w0 the longest element
in the corresponding ﬁnite Weyl group.
4.3.1
Type B2
The following diagrams show the right (resp. two-sided) cells and the corre-
sponding preorders in type B2:
right cells
two-sided cells
KL-cells:
{Id}
{s, st, sts}
{t, ts, tst}
{w0}
{Id}
{s, t, st, ts, sts, tst}
{w0}
2-cells:
{Id}
{s}
{st, sts}
{t, ts, tst}
{w0}
{Id}
{s}
{t, st, ts, sts, tst}
{w0}
Lusztig showed in [Lus83b, Proposition 3.8] that the set C of non-trivial ele-
ments in a Coxeter group that have a unique reduced expression always forms a
Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell and for any s ∈S the set sC := {w ∈C | L(w) =
{s}} gives a Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell. The example above shows that both
statements do not hold for p-cells in general.
Observe that in characteristic 0 we have for x, y ∈Wf (see [Lus03, Corollary
11.7]) the following equivalences
x
0
⩽
R y ⇔yw0
0
⩽
R xw0 ⇔w0y
0
⩽
R w0x
and the same statement for the left and two-sided cell preorder. The last exam-
ple also shows that the analogous statement does not hold for p-cells.
4.3.2
Type G2
The following diagrams show the right (resp. two-sided) cells and the corre-
sponding preorders in type G2 using the notation from the last subsection. In
particular, C, sC and tC are deﬁned as in the last subsection.


PDF PAGE 47
4.3
(Counter-)Examples
41
right cells
two-sided cells
KL-cells:
{Id}
sC
tC
{w0}
{Id}
C
{w0}
2-cells:
{Id}
{s, st}
sC \ {s, st}
{t, ts}
tC \ {t, ts}
{w0}
{Id}
{s, t, st, ts}
C \ {s, t, st, ts}
{w0}
3-cells:
{Id}
{s}
sC \ {s}
tC
{w0}
{Id}
{s}
C \ {s}
{w0}
4.3.3
Kazhdan-Lusztig cells do not decompose into p-cells
In this section, we will present the smallest example where Kazhdan-Lusztig
cells do not decompose into p-cells. This happens in type C3 for p = 2. We
label the simple reﬂections as follows (also note their colours):
1
2
3 ⇔Cartan matrix:



2,
−1
0
−2
2
−1
0
−1
2



Explicit computer calculation gives the following Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells:
C0 = {Id}
C1 = {1, 12, 121, 123}
C2 = {2, 21, 23, 212, 2123}
C3 = {3, 32, 321, 3212, 32123}
C4 = {13, 132, 1321}
C5 = {213, 2132, 21321}
C6 = {232, 2321, 23212}
C7 = {2121, 21213, 212132, 2121321, 21213213}


PDF PAGE 48
42
4
GENERAL P-CELL THEORY
C8 = {1213, 12132, 121321}
C9 = {1232, 12321, 123212}
C10 = {13212, 132123, 1213212, 1232123, 12132123}
C11 = {21232, 212321, 21232121}
C12 = {232123, 232121, 2321213, 23212132}
C13 = {w0}
For p = 2 these right Kazhdan-Lusztig cells exhibit the following decompo-
sition behaviour into right p-cells:
C2 = {2, 21}
| {z }
pC2′
∪{23, 212, 2123}
|
{z
}
pC2′′
C3 = {3, 32}
| {z }
pC3′
∪{321, 3212, 32123}
|
{z
}
pC3′′
C6 ∪C12 = {232}
| {z }
pC6
∪{2321, 23212, 232123}
|
{z
}
pC6/12
∪{232121, 2321213, 23212132}
|
{z
}
pC12
Ci = pCi for i ∈{0 . . . 13} \ {2, 3, 6, 12}
The Hasse-diagrams of the cell preorders look as follows. We display Kazhdan-
Lusztig right cells on the left and right p-cells on the right. In these diagrams
the cells that are depicted at one height form a two-sided cell.
C0
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C8
C9
C11
C6
C10
C7
C12
C13
pC0
pC3′
pC2′
pC1
pC3′′
pC2′′
pC8
pC4
pC5
pC6
pC9
pC6/12
pC11
pC10
pC7
pC12
pC13
Finally, let us try to explain the non-trivial decomposition behaviour. For
the elements in C6 ∪C12 we have:
2H23212 = H23212 + H232
2H232123 = H232123 + (v + v−1)H232
2H23212132 = H23212132 + H232123
2Hx = Hx for x ∈(C6 ∪C12) \ {23212, 232123, 23212132}


PDF PAGE 49
4.4
A Conjecture
43
The subquotient H p
⩽
R
C6/H p
<
R
C12 is a module for the Hecke algebra and the
action on the 2-canonical basis of this module can be encoded in the following
graph:
2H232
2H2321
2H23212
2H232123
2H2321231
2H23212132
2H232121
2
v + v−1
2
C6
C12
Note that we omitted all edge labels equal to 1 and all loops labelled with
v + v−1. The strongly connected components of this graph give the right p-
cells pC6, pC6/12 and pC12. From this we see that neither two-sided nor right
Kazhdan-Lusztig cells decompose into the corresponding p-cells in this example.
In this case we cannot apply the decomposition criterion from Section 4.2
because the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell C12 does not satisfy the assumptions of
Corollary 4.19.
In type B3 the right (and two-sided) Kazhdan-Lusztig do decompose into
right (resp. two-sided) p-cells, whereas in type B4 they do not. This calcula-
tion together with Corollary 5.25 completely settles the question of when right
Kazhdan-Lusztig cells decompose into right p-cells in types B and C. In sum-
mary, right Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in types Bn and Cn decompose into right
p-cells for p > 2 or p = 2 and n ⩽3 in type Bn.
4.4
A Conjecture
In this section, we present a conjecture that is based on extensive computer
calculations (mostly for p-cells in ﬁnite type).
Using Lusztig’s a-function, one can show that Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells
within the same two-sided cell are incomparable.
This follows from [Lus03,
Conjectures 14.2 P10]. Our calculations support the following generalization:
Conjecture 4.23.
The right p-cells within the same two-sided p-cell are incomparable.
We have veriﬁed this in types Bn, Cn for n ⩽5, Dn for n ⩽5, F4 and G2
for all primes p.


PDF PAGE 50
44
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
5
Left and Right Star Operations
In the section, we will prove consequences of the Kazhdan-Lusztig star-operations
for the p-canonical basis.
The star-operations were originally introduced in
[KL79, §4], generalizing (dual) Knuth operations from the symmetric group to
pairs of simple reﬂections r, t ∈S in general Coxeter groups with mr,t = 3.
In the literature, there doesn’t seem to exist a consensus on how to general-
ize the star-operations to the case 3 < mr,t < ∞. We propose the following
generalization as in [BG15, Remark 4.3]:
Deﬁnition 5.1. Let r, t ∈S be two simple reﬂections. Deﬁne:
DL(r, t) := {w ∈W | |L(w) ∩{r, t}| = 1}
DR(r, t) := {w ∈W | |R(w) ∩{r, t}| = 1}
Set m := mr,t. For 1 ⩽k ⩽m denote by rˆk = rtrt . . . the alternating word
in r and t starting in r of length k.
Recall that W {r,t} denotes the set of
representatives of minimal length of cosets in W/⟨r, t⟩(see Deﬁnition 4.8). Any
coset in W/⟨r, t⟩contains a unique element ew ∈W {r,t} and can be partitioned
in the following sets:
(
{ ew} ∪{ ew · rˆk | 1 ⩽k < m} ∪{ ew · tˆk | 1 ⩽k < m} ∪{ ew · t ˆm}
if m < ∞,
{ ew} ∪{ ew · rˆk | 1 ⩽k} ∪{ ew · tˆk | 1 ⩽k}
if m = ∞.
For m < ∞the element ew · t ˆm is the unique element of maximal length in
the coset. The set { ew · xˆk | 1 ⩽k < m} for some x ∈{r, t} is called a right
⟨r, t⟩-string (also for m = ∞) and contained in DR(r, t). The element ew · xˆk is
the k-th element in this string.
It is easy to see that actually any element w ∈DR(r, t) lies in a right ⟨r, t⟩-
string and can thus be written as ew · xˆk for some x ∈{r, t} and 1 ⩽k < m
where ew is the element of minimal length in the right coset w⟨r, t⟩∈W/⟨r, t⟩.
Assume 3 ⩽m < ∞. Then the right star operation (−)∗is an involution on
DR(r, t) sending w = ew · xˆk for x and k as above to ew · x \
(m −k). The left star
operation ∗(−) is an involution on DL(r, t) deﬁned analogously.
It follows immediately that the left and right star operations are related via:
∗w = ((w−1)∗)−1.
Fix for the rest of the section two simple reﬂections r, t ∈S with 3 ⩽m :=
mr,t < ∞. The multiplication formula for the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis (6) does
not easily generalize to the p-canonical basis. However it will still be important
to understand the structure coeﬃcients of the p-canonical basis a little bit better.
The next lemma states a crucial observation that will be used frequently below.
Lemma 5.2. Let x, z ∈DR(r, t) with r ∈R(x).
The coeﬃcient of Hz in
pHxHt is given by
δzr∈DR(r,t)
pmzr,x + δzt∈DR(r,t)
pmzt,x
where δzr∈DR(r,t) is the Kronecker delta.


PDF PAGE 51
45
Proof. Rewrite the product pHxHt as follows:
pHxHt = (Hx +
X
v<x
pmv,xHv)Ht
=
X
z⩽xt
zt<z
µ(z, x)Hz +
X
v<x
vt>v
pmv,x




X
z⩽vt
zt<z
µ(z, v)Hz




+
X
z<x
zt<z
(v + v−1)pmz,xHz
If t is not in the right descent set of z, the coeﬃcient in front of Hz has to be
zero. By Proposition 3.10(v) the formula stated above also gives zero in this case.
Thus, we assume t ∈R(z) from now on. Since z lies in DR(r, t), this implies
that r does not lie in the right descent set of z. Consider an element v ∈W with
pmv,x ̸= 0 such that Hz occurs with non-zero coeﬃcient in HvHt. Observe that
v could be x. By Proposition 3.10(v) pmv,x ̸= 0 implies r ∈R(x) ⊆R(v). Since
the right descent sets diﬀer, v and z cannot coincide. In particular, v does not
have t in its right descent set and thus also lies in DR(r, t). (Otherwise Hz could
not occur with non-zero coeﬃcient in HvHt.) Recall the following important
fact about the µ-coeﬃcients (from [KL79, (2.3.f)]):
Lemma 5.3. Let z < v ∈W and r ∈R(v) \ R(z). Then we have:
µ(z, v) ̸= 0 ⇔v = zr
Moreover, µ(z, v) = 1 in this case.
If z < v holds, then we may apply this lemma to z < v and the simple
reﬂection r to get that v = zr. Otherwise, we have z = vt > v (due to the
multiplication formula). In both cases, we see that z and v lie in the same right
⟨r, t⟩-string and the coeﬃcient of Hz in pHxHt is
δzr∈DR(r,t)
pmzr,x + δzt∈DR(r,t)
pmzt,x.
Deﬁnition 5.4. The weak right Bruhat graph of (W, S) is the labelled directed
graph with vertex set W and edge set
{(w, ws) | w ∈W, s ∈S \ R(w)}.
For w ∈W and s ∈S \ R(w) the edge (w, ws) is labelled by αs.
The reader may picture this as follows: Consider the subgraph of the weak
right Bruhat graph on the vertices Dr,t ∩(z⟨r, t⟩) and only edges labelled by αr
or αt. In order to get the coeﬃcient of Hz in pHxHt we simply have to slide
the coeﬃcients pm?,x up along an edge labelled by αt and down along an edge
labelled by αr and sum them up if two coeﬃcients collide at a vertex in the
process. Here, up and down are meant with respect to the weak right Bruhat
order.
For the rest of the section, we will assume:
p >







1
if m = 3,
2
if m = 4,
3
if m = 6.


PDF PAGE 52
46
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
This ensures that for w ∈⟨r, t⟩we have pHw = Hw.
Proposition 5.5. Let σx = {x1 < x2 < . . . } and σz = {z1 < z2 < . . . } be
two right ⟨r, t⟩-strings consisting of m−1 elements. Then we have the following
relations between the coeﬃcients pmzj,xi:
m = 3 ⇒
(
pmz1,x1 = pmz2,x2
pmz2,x1 = pmz1,x2
(7)
m = 4 ⇒











pmz1,x1 = pmz3,x3
pmz2,x1 = pmz1,x2 = pmz3,x2 = pmz2,x3
pmz3,x1 = pmz1,x3
pmz2,x2 = pmz1,x1 + pmz3,x1
(8)
m = 6 ⇒



































pmz1,x1 = pmz5,x5
pmz2,x1 = pmz1,x2 = pmz5,x4 = pmz4,x5
pmz3,x1 = pmz1,x3 = pmz5,x3 = pmz3,x5
pmz4,x1 = pmz1,x4 = pmz5,x2 = pmz2,x5
pmz5,x1 = pmz1,x5
pmz2,x2 = pmz4,x4 = pmz1,x1 + pmz3,x1
pmz3,x2 = pmz2,x3 = pmz4,x3 = pmz3,x4 = pmz2,x1 + pmz4,x1
pmz4,x2 = pmz2,x4 = pmz3,x1 + pmz5,x1
pmz3,x3 = pmz1,x1 + pmz3,x1 + pmz5,x1
(9)
Proof. Comparing Laurent polynomials coeﬃcient-wise induces a partial order
which we will use in the following. For x ∈DR(r, t) with r ∈R(x), rewrite
pHxHt in terms of the p-canonical basis to get:
X
v⩽xt
pµv
x,t
pHv
Express this in the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis and use Lemma 5.2 to see that we
have the following inequality for z ∈DR(r, t):
X
z⩽v⩽xt
pµv
x,t
pmz,v ⩽δzr∈DR(r,t)
pmzr,x + δzt∈DR(r,t)
pmzt,x
(10)
We want to use a weaker form of this inequality together with the fact
that we understand the structure coeﬃcients in the right ⟨r, t⟩-coset of x (see
Corollary 4.12). Let si ∈{r, t} be the simple reﬂection such that xisi > xi for
1 ⩽i ⩽m −1. Write x0 (resp. xm) for the shortest (resp. longest) element
in the right ⟨r, t⟩-coset of x. Similarly for z0 and zm. We can restrict the sum
on the left hand side to v ∈σx and v ⩽xt.
From Corollary 4.12 and the
explicit knowledge of the structure constants of the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis in
the dihedral case we deduce:
pHxi
pHsi =
(
pHx2
if i = 1,
pHxi+1 + pHxi−1
otherwise.




mod
X
w<xi+1
w /∈σx
Z[v, v−1] pHw







PDF PAGE 53
47
Using this in inequality (10) and letting x and z in their right ⟨r, t⟩-string vary,
we obtain for 1 ⩽i, j ⩽m −1:
δxi+1∈σx
pmzj,xi+1 + δxi−1∈σx
pmzj,xi−1 ⩽δzj+1∈σz
pmzj+1,xi + δzj−1∈σz
pmzj−1,xi (∗i,j)
Surprisingly enough, any solution to this system of inequalities satisﬁes all
inequalities with equality. We will solve this system of linear inequalities for
m = 6 and leave the cases m ∈{3, 4} to the reader. To simplify notation, write
aj,i = pmzj,xi for all 1 ⩽i, j ⩽m −1 and view them as indeterminates. The
set of inequalities can be partitioned into two sets of inequalities which can be
solved completely independently:
{(∗i,j) | i + j even} ∪{(∗i,j) | i + j odd}
First, let us consider {(∗i,j) | i + j even}:
a1,2 ⩽a2,1
(i)
a3,2 ⩽a2,1 + a4,1
(ii)
a5,2 ⩽a4,1
(iii)
a2,3 + a2,1 ⩽a1,2 + a3,2
(iv)
a4,3 + a4,1 ⩽a3,2 + a5,2
(v)
a1,4 + a1,2 ⩽a2,3
(vi)
a3,4 + a3,2 ⩽a2,3 + a4,3
(vii)
a5,4 + a5,2 ⩽a4,3
(viii)
a2,5 + a2,3 ⩽a1,4 + a3,4
(ix)
a4,5 + a4,3 ⩽a3,4 + a5,4
(x)
a1,4 ⩽a2,5
(xi)
a3,4 ⩽a2,5 + a4,5
(xii)
a5,4 ⩽a4,5
(xiii)
Consider the following chain of inequalities:
a2,1
(iv)
⩽a1,2 +a3,2 −a2,3
(vii)
⩽a1,2 +a4,3 −a3,4
(x)
⩽a1,2 +a5,4 −a4,5
(xiii)
⩽a1,2
(i)
⩽a2,1
This implies that the Equations (i), (iv), (vii), (x) and (xiii) are all satisﬁed
with equality, which in turn implies:
a2,3 = a3,2
a3,4 = a4,3
Next, consider the following chain:
a4,1
(v)
⩽a3,2 +a5,2 −a4,3
(vii)
= a2,3 −a3,4 +a5,2
(ix)
⩽a1,4 −a2,5 +a5,2
(xi)
⩽a5,2
(iii)
⩽a4,1
This shows that the Equations (iii), (v), (ix) and (xi) are also satisﬁed with
equality, from which we deduce:
a2,3 = a3,2 = a3,4 = a4,3


PDF PAGE 54
48
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
Finally, we have
a1,4 + a1,2
(vi)
⩽a2,3 = a3,2
(ii)
⩽a2,1 + a4,1
and
a5,4 + a5,2
(viii)
⩽a4,3 = a3,4
(xii)
⩽a2,5 + a4,5
which imply using a1,2 = a2,1 and a5,4 = a4,5 respectively
a1,4 ⩽a4,1
a5,2 ⩽a2,5
Using a1,4 = a2,5 and a4,1 = a5,2 ﬁnishes the argument.
Next, we solve {(∗i,j) | i + j odd}:
a2,2 ⩽a1,1 + a3,1
(i’)
a4,2 ⩽a3,1 + a5,1
(ii’)
a1,3 + a1,1 ⩽a2,2
(iii’)
a3,3 + a3,1 ⩽a2,2 + a4,2
(iv’)
a5,3 + a5,1 ⩽a4,2
(v’)
a2,4 + a2,2 ⩽a1,3 + a3,3
(vi’)
a4,4 + a4,2 ⩽a3,3 + a5,3
(vii’)
a1,5 + a1,3 ⩽a2,4
(viii’)
a3,5 + a3,3 ⩽a2,4 + a4,4
(ix’)
a5,5 + a5,3 ⩽a4,4
(x’)
a2,4 ⩽a1,5 + a3,5
(xi’)
a4,4 ⩽a3,5 + a5,5
(xii’)
In this case we argue as follows:
a1,1
(iii’)
⩽a2,2 −a1,3
(vi’)
⩽a3,3 −a2,4
(ix’)
⩽a4,4 −a3,5
(xii’)
⩽a5,5
We use this in the last inequality of the following chain:
a3,1
(iv’)
⩽a2,2 + a4,2 −a3,3
(vii’)
⩽a2,2 + a5,3 −a4,4
(x’)
⩽a2,2 −a5,5
(i’)
⩽a1,1 + a3,1 −a5,5 ⩽a3,1
This implies that a1,1 = a5,5 and the Equations (i’), (iii’), (iv’), (vi’), (vii’),
(ix’), (x’) and (xii’) are satisﬁed with equality. Moreover, we have the following
equivalences:
(i’) = (iii’) ⇔a1,3 = a3,1 ⇔(iv’) = (vi’)
⇔a2,4 = a4,2 ⇔(vii’) = (ix’)
⇔a5,3 = a3,5 ⇔(x’) = (xii’)
The last four inequalities can be used as follows:
a5,3 + a5,1
(v’)
⩽a4,2
(ii’)
⩽a3,1 + a5,1
a1,5 + a1,3
(viii’)
⩽a2,4
(xi’)
⩽a1,5 + a3,5
This gives a5,3 ⩽a3,1 = a1,3 ⩽a3,5 = a5,3 and ﬁnishes the argument.


PDF PAGE 55
49
Finally, observe that the space of solutions for these inequalities is a free
Z[v, v−1]-module of rank m −1 is and we can choose {a1,1, a2,1, . . . , am−1,1}
as a basis.
In other words, the solution is uniquely determined after ﬁxing
these Laurent polynomials. Of course, not every solution gives a possible set of
base change coeﬃcients {pmzj,xi | 1 ⩽i, j ⩽m −1} as these coeﬃcients have
to satisfy more constraints: Proposition 3.10(iii) shows that these coeﬃcients
are self-dual and have non-negative integers as coeﬃcients. Moreover, due to
Proposition 3.10(v) these coeﬃcients satisfy parity vanishing for ﬁxed i and
arbitrary 1 ⩽j ⩽m −1. This is also the underlying reason why we could
partition the set of inequalities in two sets.
In practice the set of variables
involved in at most one of these sets is non-zero for ﬁxed strings σx and σz.
From all these equalities, the reader easily deduces the relations given in the
proposition where we expressed each coeﬃcient in terms of our chosen basis of
the solution space.
Corollary 5.6. For z ⩽x ∈DR(r, t) one has:
pmz,x = pmz∗,x∗
Proof. Note that pmz,x = pmz∗,x∗asks only for ai,j = am−i,m−j for 1 ⩽i, j ⩽
m −1 whereas we have shown many more relations among these coeﬃcients in
the last proposition.
In the proof of Proposition 5.5 we have seen that when translating kBx by
kBt for x ∈DR(r, t) with xt > x the available coeﬃcient of Hz in pHxHt for
z ∈DR(r, t) is completely subsumed by the neighbouring elements of x in its
right ⟨r, t⟩-string. This implies the following about the structure coeﬃcients:
Corollary 5.7. Let x, z ∈DR(r, t) with xt > x. Then pµz
x,t vanishes unless x
and z are neighbouring elements in the same right ⟨r, t⟩-string.
The next result will allow us to apply the star-operations to the study of
p-cells. It is a generalization of [Lus85, (10.4.1), (10.4.2) and (10.4.3)]:
Proposition 5.8. Let σx = {x1 < x2 < . . . } (resp. σz = {z1 < z2 < . . . }) be
two right ⟨r, t⟩-strings consisting of m −1 elements. For any s ∈S \ L(x1) all
the relations stated in Proposition 5.5 hold with pmzj,xi replaced by pµzj
s,xi.
Proof. Lemma 5.10 shows that all elements in σx lie in the same right p-cell.
We therefore deduce from Lemma 4.4 that all elements in σx have the same left
descent set and satisfy sxi > xi for 1 ⩽i ⩽m −1.
Write x0 (resp. xm) for the shortest (resp. longest) element in the right
⟨r, t⟩-coset of x. Similarly for z0 and zm. We are interested in the structure
coeﬃcients pµzj
s,xi for 1 ⩽i, j ⩽m −1. To simplify notation, write aj,i = pµzj
s,xi.
Fix 1 ⩽i ⩽m −1 arbitrary. We may assume without loss of generality
xit > xi and thus r ∈R(xi). The main idea is to express pHs
pHxi
pHt in
the p-canonical basis in diﬀerent ways and to analyze the coeﬃcients in front of
basis elements indexed by elements in σz. Depending on which multiplication
in pHs
pHxi
pHt we ﬁrst carry out, we get two ways to express this product in
terms of the p-canonical basis. On the one hand we have:
pHs
pHxi
pHt = (
X
v⩽sxi
pµv
s,xi
pHv) pHt


PDF PAGE 56
50
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
=
X
v⩽sxi
vt<v
(v + v−1)pµv
s,xi
pHv +
X
v⩽sxi∧w⩽vt
vt>v
pµv
s,xi
pµw
v,t
pHw
Consider an element v ⩽sxi with pµv
s,xi ̸= 0. The version of Lemma 4.4 for left
cells implies r ∈R(v) and in particular v is not minimal in its right ⟨r, t⟩-coset.
This implies:
v ∈DR(r, t) ⇔vt > v
Assume v ∈DR(r, t).
Combining Corollary 5.7 and Corollary 4.12 we have
full control over the p-canonical basis elements indexed by elements in DR(r, t)
that occur in pHv
pHt. Therefore, the only p-canonical basis elements that are
indexed by elements in σz and that occur with non-trivial coeﬃcient in this
product are the following:
X
1⩽j⩽m−1
aj,i(δzj+1∈σz
pHzj+1 + δzj−1∈σz
pHzj−1)
On the other hand we can rewrite the product as follows:
pHs
pHxi
pHt = pHs(
X
v⩽xit
pµv
xi,t
pHv)
=
X
w⩽xit
sw<w
(v + v−1)pµw
xi,t
pHw +
X
v⩽xit∧w⩽sv
sv>v
pµv
xi,t
pµw
s,v
pHw
Consider an element v ⩽xit with pµv
xi,t ̸= 0. It follows that v has t in its right
descent set. The version of Lemma 4.4 for left cells shows that pHs
pHv can
only contribute p-canonical basis elements indexed by elements in DR(r, t) if v
lies in DR(r, t) itself. Using Corollary 5.7 and Corollary 4.12 again, we see that
the only p-canonical basis elements that are indexed by elements in σz and that
occur with non-trivial coeﬃcient in this product are the following:
X
1⩽j⩽m−1
(δxi+1∈σxaj,i+1 + δxi−1∈σxaj,i−1) pHzj
Comparing coeﬃcients in front of pHzj we get:
δzj−1∈σzaj−1,i + δzj+1∈σzaj+1,i = δxi+1∈σxaj,i+1 + δxi−1∈σxaj,i−1
Letting i and j vary, we see that the aj,i’s satisfy precisely the inequalities
(i) - (xiii) and (i’) - (xii’) (with equality).
Corollary 5.9. Let x, z ∈DR(r, t) and s ∈S such that sx > x. Then we have
pµy
s,x = pµy∗
s,x∗
where (−)∗is the right star-operation with respect to {r, t}.
Using the Z[v, v−1]-linear anti-involution ι on H we can translate all the
results in this section about right strings and right star-operations into results
about left strings and left star-operations.


PDF PAGE 57
5.1
Consequences for p-Cells
51
5.1
Consequences for p-Cells
As we have seen in the last section one needs some assumptions on p for the
left and right star-operations to be well-behaved.
Therefore, we keep these
assumptions throughout this subsection.
Fix for the rest of the section two
simple reﬂections r, t ∈S with 3 ⩽m := mr,t < ∞. Throughout the section we
consider the right star-operation (−)∗with respect to {r, t}.
Under these assumptions, the p-cells in any ﬁnite Weyl group of rank 2 coin-
cide with the Kazhdan-Lusztig cells (see Section 4.3). Therefore, Theorem 4.9
implies for I = {r, t} ⊆S:
Lemma 5.10. Let σ be any right ⟨r, t⟩-string. Then all elements of σ lie in the
same right p-cell of W.
In particular, we have the following result:
Corollary 5.11. For all x ∈DR(r, t), x and x∗lie in the same right p-cell.
The following important result follows from Corollary 5.9:
Theorem 5.12. For x, y ∈DR(r, t) and s ∈S we have:
x
p
⩽
L y ⇔x∗
p
⩽
L y∗
In particular, if x and y lie the same left p-cell, then the same holds for x∗and
y∗.
Deﬁnition 5.13. For r, t ∈S with rt ̸= tr and x ∈DR(r, t) we denote by σx
the right ⟨r, t⟩-string through x. Deﬁne Tr,t(x) := {xr, xt} ∩DR(r, t) to be the
neighbouring elements of x in σx.
View Tr,t as a map σx →P(σx) where P(σx) denotes the power set of σx.
We deﬁne T2
r,t : σx →P(σx) to be the map sending y ∈σx to S
z∈Tr,t(y) Tr,t(z).
For l ⩾2, the map Tl
r,t is deﬁned inductively in a similar fashion.
Actually, one can characterize precisely the possible left p-cell preorder rela-
tions between elements in right ⟨r, t⟩-strings:
Proposition 5.14. Let σ = {x1 < x2 < . . . } (resp. σ′ = {y1 < y2 < . . . }) be
two right ⟨r, t⟩-strings consisting of m−1 elements. Up to possibly interchanging
the roles of σ and σ′, the set of left p-cell preorder relations between the elements
of these two strings is one of the following:
no relation: {}
(∅)
trivial case: {xi
p
⩽
L yi | ∀1 ⩽i ⩽m −1}
(T)
permuted case: {xi
p
⩽
L yπ(i) | ∀1 ⩽i ⩽m −1}
(P)
neighbour case: {xi
p
⩽
L y | ∀1 ⩽i ⩽m −1, y ∈Tk
r,t(yi)}
(Nk)
permuted
neighour case: {xi
p
⩽
L yπ(j) | ∀1 ⩽i ⩽m −1, yj ∈Tl
r,t(yi)}
(PNl)
zig-zag case: {xi−1
p
⩽
L yi+1, xi
p
⩽
L yi, xi+1
p
⩽
L yi−1 | ∀2 ⩽i ⩽m −2}
(Z)


PDF PAGE 58
52
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
for 1 ⩽k ⩽m−2, 1 ⩽l ⩽m−4 where π = (1, m−1)(2, m−2) is a permutation
of {1, 2, . . . , m −1}.
Proof. The proof strategy is as follows: By applying Proposition 5.8 to the
relation y
p→
L x via s ∈S, we get other elementary left p-cell relations between
the elements in σx and σy. The idea is to encode them in a function f : σy →
P(σx) such that
pµxj
s,yi ̸= 0 ⇔xj ∈f(yi).
The claim of the proposition is that there is a normal form of arbitrary ﬁnite
compositions of such functions. If g : σx →P(σz) is another such function,
their composition g ◦f : σy →P(σz) sends yi to S
xj∈f(yi) g(xj). This is simply
the composition of multi-valued functions.
In order to simplify notation, we will identify the j-th element in a right
⟨r, t⟩-string with its position j. This allows us to view any such f as a map
{1, 2, . . . , m −1} →P({1, 2, . . . , m −1}). The composition of such functions is
to be understood in a similar fashion. One needs to keep track of the start and
end string of the whole composition in order to retranslate the function into the
set of left p-cell relations. Using Corollary 5.9 we see that such a map is already
fully determined by the images of 1, 2, . . . , ⌈m−1
2 ⌉.
We will prove the statement for m = 6 and leave the other cases to the
reader. Apart from the identity Id : i 7→{i} consider the following maps:
1 7→{3}
1 7→{2}
a : 2 7→{2, 4}
b : 2 7→{1, 3}
3 7→{1, 3, 5}
3 7→{2, 4}
1 7→{4}
c : 2 7→{3, 5}
p : i 7→{π(i)}
3 7→{2, 4}
Using Proposition 5.8 it is easy to check that any elementary left p-cell relation
implies relations encoded by one of the functions above, for example 3
p→
L
3
implies relations encoded by either Id, a or p. Analyzing the relations among
compositions of these functions, one has:
a ◦p = p ◦a = a
b ◦p = p ◦b = c
b ◦c = c ◦b
p2 = Id
a ◦b = b ◦a = b3
ak = a2 = b4 = b2k = b2k ◦p for k ⩾2
b3 = b2k+1 = b2k+1 ◦p for k ⩾1
Using these relations, we see that any ﬁnite composition of these maps can be
reduced to one of the following compositions
Id, p, bk for 1 ⩽k ⩽4, bl ◦p for 1 ⩽l ⩽2, a.


PDF PAGE 59
5.1
Consequences for p-Cells
53
These correspond precisely to the cases with at least one relation stated in the
proposition.
Remark 5.15. It should be noted that for m < 6 some of these cases coincide.
For example for m = 3, the permutation π is trivial and there are only three
distinct cases: The permuted case coincides with the trivial case. Moreover,
the zig-zag case does not contain any relations and the permuted neighbour
case does not exist. For m = 4, there are four distinct cases: The zig-zag case
reduces to the permuted case and the permuted neighbour case does not exist.
The normal forms given in the proof of Proposition 5.14 allow us to deduce
the following equivalences, which show how rigid the combinatorics in this sit-
uation are. The reader should compare these equivalences with Proposition 5.8
which only deals with the generating relations for the p-cell preorder. It is a
generalization of [Shi94, Proposition 4.6 and Remark 4.7]:
Corollary 5.16. Let σ = {x1 < x2 < . . . } (resp. σ′ = {y1 < y2 < . . . }) be two
right ⟨r, t⟩-strings consisting of m−1 elements. In addition to x
p
⩽
L y ⇔x∗
p
⩽
L y∗
for x ∈σ and y ∈σ′ we get the following equivalences:
m = 4 ⇒







x1
p
⩽
L y2 ⇔x2
p
⩽
L y1
x2
p
⩽
L y2 ⇔(x1
p
⩽
L y1 ∨x1
p
⩽
L y3)
(11)
m = 6 ⇒











































x1
p
⩽
L y2 ⇔x2
p
⩽
L y1
x1
p
⩽
L y3 ⇔x3
p
⩽
L y1
x1
p
⩽
L y4 ⇔x4
p
⩽
L y1
x2
p
⩽
L y2 ⇔(x1
p
⩽
L y1 ∨x1
p
⩽
L y3)
x2
p
⩽
L y3 ⇔x3
p
⩽
L y2 ⇔(x1
p
⩽
L y2 ∨x1
p
⩽
L y4)
x2
p
⩽
L y4 ⇔(x1
p
⩽
L y3 ∨x1
p
⩽
L y5)
x3
p
⩽
L y3 ⇔(x1
p
⩽
L y1 ∨x1
p
⩽
L y3 ∨x1
p
⩽
L y5)
(12)
We can now generalize [Lus85, Proposition 10.7] as follows:
Proposition 5.17. Let r, t ∈S and Γ be a union of left p-cells such that
Γ ⊆DR(r, t). Then the following holds:
(i) eΓ := (S
w∈Γ σw) \ Γ is a union of left p-cells, where σw denotes the right
⟨r, t⟩-string through w.
(ii) If Γ is a left p-cell, then eΓ is a union of at most mr,t −2 left p-cells.
(iii) If Γ is a left p-cell, then Γ∗:= {w∗| w ∈Γ} is a left p-cell as well.


PDF PAGE 60
54
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
Proof. For two left p-cells Γ1 and Γ2 contained in DR(r, t) we have:
^
(Γ1 ∪Γ2) =


[
w∈Γ1∪Γ2
σw

\ (Γ1 ∪Γ2)
=
(f
Γ1 ∩f
Γ2
if f
Γ1 ∩f
Γ2 ̸= ,
f
Γ1 ∪f
Γ2
otherwise.
Therefore, we may assume without loss of generality that Γ is a left p-cell. It is
enough to prove that S
w∈Γ σw is a union of left p-cells. Let x ∈S
w∈Γ σw and
y ∈W such that x
p∼
L y. Then there exists a sequence
P : x = x0
p→
L x1
p→
L . . .
p→
L xk = y
p→
L xk+1
p→
L . . .
p→
L xl = x
of elements in DR(r, t) that all lie in the same left p-cell as x and y. Consider the
right ⟨r, t⟩-strings of all the elements in the sequence and note that σx contains
an element ¯x ∈Γ. Since each ⟨r, t⟩-string is contained in a right p-cell, the
elements have the same left descent set and thus in each step we can apply
the simple reﬂection used to get from xi to xi+1 to all the elements in σxi for
1 ⩽i ⩽l −1. The given sequence gives for any z ∈σx a set fP (z) of elements
in σx such that z
p
⩾
L z′ if and only if z′ ∈fP (z). Using Proposition 5.14 we see
that for n ≫1 the image of f 2n
P
stabilizes in the sense that z ∈f 2n
P (z). The
element ¯x shows that there is an element in σy ∩Γ which implies y ∈S
w∈Γ σw
and ﬁnishes the proof of (i).
We claim that any left p-cell Γ′ in S
w∈Γ σw intersects σx non-trivially. Let
y ∈Γ′ and ¯y ∈σy ∩Γ. Use a sequence P as above relating ¯x and ¯y to construct
fP : σx →P(σx). Proposition 5.14 shows that there exist x′ ∈σx such that
x′
p
⩾
L y. Using the stabilization of fP as above, we get x′ ∈f 2n
P (x′) for n ≫1
and in particular x′ lies Γ′ ∩σx. This ﬁnishes the proof of the claim and shows
that eΓ is a union of at most mr,t −2 left p-cells giving (ii).
(iii) is an immediate consequence of Theorem 5.12.
Remark 5.18. Analyzing the situation more carefully allows us to say more
about the number of left p-cells in eΓ. Let x, y ∈Γ. Consider f n
P constructed as
in the last proof for a sequence P relating x and y. The proof of Proposition 5.14
shows that f 2n
P
for n ≫1 stabilizes to one of the following maps:
ftriv : σx −→P(σx)
or
fnontriv : σx −→P(σx)
xi
7−→{xi}
x2l−1
7−→{x2k−1 | 1 ⩽k ⩽
m
2

}
x2l
7−→{x2k | 1 ⩽k ⩽
m −2
2

}
Finally, let P vary over all potential sequences and y vary over the elements in
Γ. If there exists an element y ∈Γ and a sequence P relating x and y such that
f n
P stabilizes to fnontriv, then eΓ is a left p-cell (note that eΓ is always non-empty
as all elements in Γ have the same right descent set and this is not the case for
all elements in σx).


PDF PAGE 61
5.1
Consequences for p-Cells
55
Another situation, in which we can say more about the number of p-cells in eΓ
is the following: If mr,t ⩾4 and there exists a string σ such that σ ∩Γ contains
only one odd-numbered element of σ, then eΓ decomposes into at least 2 left
p-cells for descent set reasons. Therefore, under these assumptions eΓ contains
precisely two right p-cells if mr,t = 4.
The deﬁnition of a W-graph from [KL79, §1] describes a based representa-
tion of the Hecke algebra. A typical example is given by a Kazhdan-Lusztig
cell module equipped with the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis, for which the W-graph
describes the action of the generating set {Hs | s ∈S} of the Hecke algebra. In
order to allow W-graphs to also describe p-cell modules, we need to slightly gen-
eralize the original deﬁnition, in which we use the generating set {Hs | s ∈S}
of the Hecke algebra instead:
Deﬁnition 5.19. A p-W-graph is a directed graph with vertices V and edges
E together with the following decorations:
• for each vertex x ∈V a subset Ix of S ,
• for each edge (x, y) ∈E a family of Laurent polynomials
{µy
s,x | s ∈Iy \ Ix} ⊂Z[v, v−1]
subject to the conditions below. Let V be the free Z[v, v−1]-module with basis
V. For s ∈S deﬁne an Z[v, v−1]-linear endomorphism of V as follows
τs(x) =





(v + v−1)x
if s ∈Ix,
P
(x,y)∈E
s∈Iy
µy
s,xy
otherwise.
where the sum is ﬁnite due to the second condition below. Then a p-W-graph
is required to satisfy:
(i) the morphism H →End(V ), Hs 7→τs extends to a morphism of Z[v, v−1]-
algebras,
(ii) for each pair (x, s) ∈V × S there are only ﬁnitely many edges (x, y) ∈E
with µy
s,x ̸= 0.
It is immediate that we can associate to each left p-cell C a p-W-graph ΓC
as deﬁned above with C as vertex set. For each x ∈C we set Ix := L(x) and
use edges to encode the structure coeﬃcients for the p-canonical basis pµy
s,x for
x, y ∈C. Observe that right star operations do not modify the left descent set.
This combined with Proposition 5.17 and Corollary 5.9 implies the following
result:
Lemma 5.20. Let C be a left p-cell contained in DR(r, t). Then the left p-
cell module associated to C is isomorphic to the left p-cell module associated to
C∗where ∗is the right star-operation associated to r and t. In particular, the
p-W-graphs ΓC and ΓC∗are isomorphic as decorated, directed graphs.


PDF PAGE 62
56
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
5.2
Vogan’s Generalized τ-Invariant
Vogan deﬁned in [Vog79, Deﬁnition 3.10] an invariant of Kazhdan-Lusztig left
cells in the setting of primitive ideals for semi-simple Lie algebras. This be-
came known as Vogan’s generalized τ-invariant and was generalized in [BG15,
Deﬁnition 5.1] to arbitrary Coxeter groups. (Observe that only pairs of simple
reﬂections {r, t} ∈W with mr,t ∈{3, 4} matter in the following deﬁnition.)
Deﬁnition 5.21. Observe that Tr,t(x) for r, t ∈S consists of one or two ele-
ments. We use the following convention: We consider Tr,t(x) as a multiset with
two identical elements in the following if {xr, xt} ∩DR(r, t) is of cardinality 1.
We deﬁne a sequence of equivalence relations ≈n for n ∈N as follows. For
x, y ∈W we write:
x ≈0 y if R(x) = R(y),
x ≈n+1 y if x ≈n y and for any pair r, t ∈S such that mr,t ∈{3, 4} and
x, y ∈DR(r, t) with Tr,t(x) = {x1, x2} and Tr,t(y) = {y1, y2}
we have: x1 ≈n y1, x2 ≈n y2 or x1 ≈n y2, x2 ≈n y1
We say that x and y have the same generalized τ-invariant if x ≈n y holds for
all n ⩾0. We call the set
{w ∈W | x ≈n w for all n ⩾0}
the τ-equivalence class of x.
Remark 5.22. Observe that the last deﬁnition admits an obvious generaliza-
tion allowing the case mr,t = 6. For our current applications, we do not need
this generality. Thus we exclude this case just like Vogan did in the original
deﬁnition.
The following result shows that left p-cells give a reﬁnement of the τ-equivalence
classes. It is a generalization of [BG15, Theorem 5.2]:
Theorem 5.23. Assume p > 2 if G has a simple factor of type Bn or Cn. Let
Γ be a left p-cell. Then all elements in Γ have the same generalized τ-invariant.
In particular, any τ-equivalence class decomposes into left p-cells.
Proof. The proof of [BG15, Theorem 5.2] works after replacing all Kazhdan-
Lusztig related constructions by their p-canonical analogues with the following
modiﬁcations: First add a zeroth case in which there exists a right ⟨s, t⟩-string
σ such that Γ ∩σ = {x′s, x′sts} for some minimal element x′ in its right ⟨s, t⟩-
coset. In this case, eΓ consists of a single left p-cell, which allows us to conclude.
Finally in the second case, use the left p-cell preorder relations for the roles of
y and w swapped instead of appealing to [Lus85, Corollary 6.3].
Corollary 5.24. Assume p > 2 if G has a simple factor of type Bn or Cn.
Assume that two elements in Wf have the same generalized τ-invariant if and
only if they belong to the same Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell (i.e. the generalized
τ-invariant gives a complete invariant of Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells).
Then
Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells decompose into left p-cells.


PDF PAGE 63
5.2
Vogan’s Generalized τ-Invariant
57
In [Vog79, Theorem 6.5], Vogan shows that the generalized τ-invariant gives
a complete invariant in ﬁnite type A. The same holds in ﬁnite types B/C (see
[Gar93, Theorem 3.5.9] based on [Gar92; Gar93, Deﬁnitions 2.1.3. - 2.1.7., 3.2.1.
and 3.4.1.]). Therefore, we have:
Corollary 5.25. The Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells in ﬁnite type A decompose into
left p-cells. The same holds in ﬁnite types B and C for p > 2.
Even though we currently can only calculate the full p-canonical basis in
types Bn and Cn for n ⩽5 and in these groups only 2-torsion occurs, the
last result is in particular of interest due to [Wil17c; Wil17b]. In these papers
Williamson shows that there is torsion in the local integral intersecion coho-
mology of Schubert varieties in the ﬂag variety of the general linear group that
grows exponentially in the rank. This implies that the p-canonical basis does
not coincide with the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis for arbitrarily large primes in type
An (and that the primes for which this occurs grow exponentially in the rank).
Since type An embeds into type Bn+1 and Cn+1 this gives many interesting
examples for which the p-canonical basis and the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis diﬀer
for large primes p.
In [Vog79, Remark following Proposition 4.4] Vogan mentions that the gen-
eralized τ-invariant is not a complete invariant in type F4. Similarly in type Dn
for n ⩾6 (see the introduction of [Gar90]).
As proposed by [Vog80, §4] and [BG15, Remark 5.3] we could have deﬁned
a potentially weaker invariant as follows:
Deﬁnition 5.26. As in Deﬁnition 5.26 we deﬁne a sequence of equivalence
relations ≈′
n for n ∈N as follows. For x, y ∈W we write:
x ≈′
0 y if R(x) = R(y),
x ≈′
n+1 y if x ≈′
n y and for any pair r, t ∈S such that ∞> mr,t ⩾3 and
x, y ∈DR(r, t) we have: x∗≈′
n y∗
where (−)∗is the right star-operation with respect to {r, t}. As above we say
that x and y have the same generalized eτ-invariant if x ≈′
n y holds for all n ⩾0.
We call the set
{w ∈W | x ≈′
n w for all n ⩾0}
the eτ-equivalence class of x.
In this case, Theorem 5.12 immediately implies that the partition of W into
left p-cells gives a reﬁnement of the eτ-equivalence classes:
Corollary 5.27. Assume p > 2 if G has a simple factor of type Bn or Cn
and p > 3 if G has a simple factor of type G2. Let Γ be a left p-cell. Then
all elements in Γ have the same generalized eτ-invariant.
In particular, any
eτ-equivalence class decomposes into left p-cells.
In [GH15, Conjecture 6.9] Geck and Halls propose a slight variation of Vo-
gan’s original conjecture (see [Vog79, Conjecture 3.11]) which goes as follows:
Conjecture 5.28.
For any ﬁnite Coxeter group Wf two elements x, y ∈Wf belong to the same
Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell if and only if x and y lie in the same Kazhdan-Lusztig
two-sided cell and in the same eτ-equivalence class.


PDF PAGE 64
58
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
They veriﬁed their conjecture in all types BCn and Dn for n ⩽9 and in
all exceptional types. Moreover, they mention that in type F4 the Kazhdan-
Lusztig left cells are precisely the eτ-equivalence classes. From this, we deduce
that for p ⩾3 the Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells in type F4 decompose into left
p-cells. Our explicit computer calculations show that the p-canonical basis and
the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis in type F4 only diﬀer for p ∈{2, 3} and for p = 2
the Kazhdan-Lusztig left cells do not decompose into left p-cells.
5.3
p-Cells in Type A
Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in type A can be characterized using the Robinson-
Schensted correspondence. This result is usually attributed to [KL79, §4] even
though the result is not stated in this form and depends on results of Joseph and
Vogan in the setting of primitive ideals. The ﬁrst combinatorial proof is due to
[GM88] and [Ari00]. In this section we transfer almost verbatim Ariki’s proof
to the modular setting. Since we feel that the proof is not as well documented
as it should be, we decided to give the proof here.
Throughout this section we assume that we used the root datum of some
PGLn together with a Borel and a split maximal torus as input. In this case
(Wf, Sf) can be identiﬁed with (Sn, {s1, . . . , sn−1}) the symmetric group to-
gether with the set of simple transpositions. Letting Sn act on {1, 2, . . . , n} on
the left, we can write any element w ∈Sn uniquely as w = w(1)w(2) . . . w(n)
which we call string notation.
Recall the deﬁnition of the elementary Knuth transformation Ki for 1 < i <
n: Let x = x1x2 . . . xn, y = y1y2 . . . yn ∈Sn be two elements of the symmetric
group in string notation. Write x ≈
Ki y if x and y diﬀer only on the substrings
xi−1xixi+1 and yi−1yiyi+1 and these substrings are related to each other in
either of the following two ways
bca ↔bac or cab ↔acb
where a < b < c. We say that x and y are Knuth equivalent if they are related by
a sequence of elementary Knuth transformations Ki for various i. The following
result follows immediately from the deﬁnitions:
Lemma 5.29. DR(si−1, si) is the subset of elements in Sn to which Ki can be
applied. Moreover, Ki(w) = w∗for all w ∈DR(si−1, si) where (−)∗is the right
star-operation deﬁned with respect to {si−1, si}.
The Robinson-Schensted correspondence (see [BB05, §A.3.3] or [Ful97, §4.1])
gives a bijection between between the symmetric group Sn and pairs of stan-
dard tableaux of the same shape with n boxes. The row-bumping algorithm
gives a way to explicitly calculate the image (P(w), Q(w)) of w ∈Sn under
the Robinson-Schensted correspondence. We will need the following important
classical result about the Robinson-Schensted correspondence (see [Ful97, §4.1,
Corollary to Symmetry Theorem]):
Theorem 5.30 (Symmetry Theorem for Sn).
If w ∈Sn corresponds to (P(w), Q(w)), then w−1 corresponds to (Q(w), P(w))
under the Robinson-Schensted correspondence.


PDF PAGE 65
5.3
p-Cells in Type A
59
Moreover, we need the following result by Knuth (see [Knu70, Theorem 6]):
Theorem 5.31. Let x, y ∈Sn. Then x and y are Knuth equivalent if and only
if P(x) = P(y).
The goal is to prove the following theorem which is known for Kazhdan-
Lusztig cells (see [Wil03, Theorem 5.4.1 and Corollary 5.4.2] or [BB05, Chapter
6, Exercise 11]):
Theorem 5.32. For x, y ∈Sn we have:
x
p∼
L y ⇔Q(x) = Q(y)
x
p∼
R y ⇔P(x) = P(y)
x
p∼
LR y ⇔Q(x) and Q(y) have the same shape
In particular, Kazhdan-Lusztig cells and p-cells of Sn coincide.
Proof. We will ﬁrst deal with the statement about left p-cells:
⇐By Theorem 5.30 we have P(x−1) = Q(x) = Q(y) = P(y−1) which implies
by Theorem 5.31 that x−1 and y−1 are related by a sequence of elementary
Knuth transformations (i.e.
right start operations with respect to diﬀerent
subsets of S consisting of two neighbouring simple reﬂections). Successive ap-
plications of Corollary 5.11 show that x−1
p∼
R y−1. This is equivalent to x
p∼
L y
by Lemma 4.6.
⇒Denote the shape of Q(x) (resp. Q(y)) by πx (resp. πy) and let Px (resp.
Py) be the column superstandard tableau (see [BB05, §A3.5] for the deﬁnition)
of shape πx (resp. πy). The Robinson-Schensted correspondence gives elements
ˆx, ˆy ∈Sn with P and Q-symbols (Px, Q(x)) and (Py, Q(y)) respectively. The
implication we proved above gives x
p∼
L
ˆx and y
p∼
L
ˆy which implies by our
assumption ˆx
p∼
L ˆy. In order to show Q(x) = Q(y) consider the elements x′, y′′ ∈
Sn corresponding to (Px, Px) and (Py, Py) respectively (under the Robinson-
Schensted correspondence). Theorem 5.31 implies that the elements ˆx and x′
as well as ˆy and y′′ are related by sequences of Knuth moves:
x′ = Kir ◦· · · ◦Ki1(ˆx)
y′′ = Kjs ◦· · · ◦Kj1(ˆy)
Lemma 4.4 for the left p-cell preorder shows that the elements ˆx and ˆy have
the same right descent set, so the same right star-operations or Knuth moves
(see Lemma 5.29) can be applied to both elements. By Theorem 5.12 we have
Ki1(ˆx)
p∼
L Ki1(ˆy) and Kj1(ˆx)
p∼
L Kj1(ˆy). Therefore, we can repeat the argument
to see that the following elements are well-deﬁned:
x′′ = Kjs ◦· · · ◦Kj1(ˆx)
y′ = Kir ◦· · · ◦Ki1(ˆy)


PDF PAGE 66
60
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
Moreover, we have x′
p∼
L y′ as well as x′′
p∼
L y′′ and thus R(x′) = R(y′) and
R(x′′) = R(y′′). Using Theorem 5.31 we see that P(x′′) = P(ˆx) = Px and
P(y′) = P(ˆy) = Py.
Denote the column lengths of πx (resp. πy) by l1, l2, . . . (resp. k1, k2, . . . ). It
follows from the row-bumping algorithm that x′ is the longest element in the
parabolic subgroup Sl1 × Sl2 × . . . of Sn, i.e. in string notation the element
l1, l1 −1, . . . , 1, l1 + l2, l1 + l2 −1, . . . , l1 + 1, . . . .
From R(x′) = R(y′) and the characterization of right descent sets for elements
in Sn in terms of inversions, we deduce that in the string notation for y′ the ﬁrst
l1 letters are decreasing as well as the next l2 letters and so on. Similarly, we
may use that y′′ is the longest element in the parabolic subgroup Sk1 ×Sk2 ×. . .
of Sn and R(x′′) = R(y′′) to deduce that in the string notation of x′′ the ﬁrst
k1 letters are decreasing, the next k2 letters are in decreasing order, etc.
Applying the row-bumping algorithm to y′ to calculate P(y′) = Py, we obtain
the inequality k1 ⩾l1. Using x′′ instead, we get the opposite inequality giving
l1 = k1. Moreover, this shows that when inserting the next l2 letters of y′, no
row bumping occurs in the ﬁrst column (otherwise we would have k1 > l1) and
thus we have k2 ⩾l2. Again, we may use x′′ to get the opposite inequality
and to show k2 = l2.
Repeating the argument, we get πx = πy and thus
Q(y′) = Py = Px = Q(x′′) (by the deﬁnition of the column superstandard
tableau and the fact that Q(−) encodes the order in which boxes are added
in the course of the row-bumping algorithm). This shows y′ = x′ = y′′ = x′′
as well as ˆx = ˆy by unravelling the sequences of Knuth moves. Finally, the
Robinson-Schensted correspondence gives Q(x) = Q(y) and ﬁnishes the proof
of the characterization of left p-cells in terms of Q-symbols.
Using Theorem 5.30 and Lemma 4.6 we obtain the version for right p-cells.
Finally, we prove the statement about two-sided p-cells:
⇐Theorem 5.31 shows that any two elements of Sn with the same P-symbol
can be related by a sequence of elementary Knuth transformations. Dually, any
two elements with the same Q-symbol are linked by a sequence of elementary
dual Knuth transformations, which we did not introduce, but which correspond
to left star-operations. Given an element of x ∈Sn we can thus transform its
P and Q symbols using Knuth transformations and their duals into any pair of
given standard tableaux of the same shape. Denote by π the shape of Q(x) and
let Pπ be the column superstandard tableau of shape π. The statement about
left and right p-cells shows that x lies in the same two-sided p-cell as the element
wπ corresponding to (Pπ, Pπ) under the Robinson-Schensted correspondence.
From this, the reader easily deduces the direction ⇐.
⇒Given an element x ∈Sn, denote by π the shape of Q(x). Let wπ be as
deﬁned above. We claim that y
p
⩽
LR x implies y
0
⩽
LR x.
Note that wπ is the longest element in a standard parabolic subgroup of Sn.
Thus we have
pHwπ = Hwπ.
(13)


PDF PAGE 67
5.3
p-Cells in Type A
61
As Q(wπ) and Q(x) have the same shape, the direction ⇐implies wπ
p∼
LR x and
wπ
0∼
LR x. The relation x
p
⩽
LR wπ together with (13) gives us for all z ⩽x:
pmz,x ̸= 0 ⇒z
0
⩽
LR wπ
Therefore, any element y
p
⩽
LR x satisﬁes y
0
⩽
LR x.
Finally, this ﬁnishes the proof of the direction ⇒by using the characterization of
the Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cells in terms of the shape of the Q-symbols.
Theorem 5.30 implies that the involutions in Sn are precisely those elements
w that satisfy P(w) = Q(w). This is the only missing observation for the next
result:
Corollary 5.33. Each left p-cell contains a unique involution. Each two-sided
p-cell contains the longest element in a standard parabolic subgroup. Let CL
(resp. CR) be a left (resp. right) p-cell. Then we have:
|CL ∩CR| =
(
1
if CL and CR lie in the same two-sided p-cell,
0
otherwise.
Let π be a permutation of n. Recall Frame, Robinson and Thrall’s hook
length formula for the number of standard tableaux of shape π ([Ful97, §4.3]):
f π =
n!
Q
(i,j)∈π hπ(i, j)
where hπ(i, j) denotes the number of boxes in the hook of (i, j) in π, i.e. in
formulas hπ(i, j) = |{(a, b) ∈π | (a = i and b ⩾j) or (a ⩾i and b = j)}|. The
following corollary shows that the hook length formula gives the answer to some
counting problems related to p-cells:
Corollary 5.34. Let C be a two-sided p-cell. Denote by π the shape of the P
and Q-symbols of the elements in C. Then the following holds:
(i) The number of left (or right) p-cells in C is given by f π.
(ii) For any left (or right) p-cell contained in C, the corresponding p-cell mod-
ule is free of rank f π over Z[v, v−1].
Observe that preorder
p
⩽
LR is by deﬁnition generated by
p
⩽
L and
p
⩽
R . It is in
general not clear though whether
p∼
LR is also generated by
p∼
L and
p∼
R . For the
Kazhdan-Lusztig cell preorder this follows using certain properties of Lusztig’s
a-function (see [Lus03, Conjectures 14.2 P9 and P10]).
Corollary 5.35. The cell preorder
p∼
LR is generated by
p∼
L and
p∼
R in type A.
As a consequence of Lemma 5.20, we get the following result which is known
for Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell modules (see [BB05, Theorem 6.5.2]) and for which
the proof works exactly as in characteristic 0:


PDF PAGE 68
62
5
LEFT AND RIGHT STAR OPERATIONS
Corollary 5.36. Let C1 and C2 be left p-cells in the same two-sided p-cell.
Then the corresponding left cell modules are isomorphic.
We want to close the section with some interesting questions that merit
further study:
• In type A, the p-canonical basis for various primes p gives a family of
interesting bases of each Kazhdan-Lusztig cell module. Which bases of
the corresponding irreducible representation of Sn do they specialize to?
In [Wil15, §1 and §2.3] Williamson explains that any p-canonical basis
element of a right (or two-sided) cell module that diﬀers from the cor-
responding Kazhdan-Lusztig basis element provides an example of a re-
ducible characteristic variety of a simple highest weight module for sln(C).
• In Type D, the generalized τ-invariant can be strengthened to give a
complete invariant of Kazhdan-Lusztig cells.
This is shown in [GPM]
which Professor McGovern kindly provided a preliminary version of. Can
one show that all elements of a left p-cell have the same strengthened
generalized τ-invariant to get that Kazhdan-Lusztig cells decompose into
p-cells in type D?


PDF PAGE 69
63
6
Tilting Modules and Modular Weight Cells
In this section we will recall some results about tensor ideals in the category of
tilting modules for a reductive algebraic group scheme. Throughout this section
we work in the following setting: Given the based root datum (X, ∆, X∨, ∆∨) we
used as input for kH (see Section 2.1). We consider the (Langlands) dual root
datum and associate to it a split connected reductive group scheme G∨
Z together
with a maximal torus T ∨
Z and a Borel B∨
Z such that T ∨
Z ⊆B∨
Z ⊆G∨
Z. The bases
∆and ∆∨give choices of positive roots Φ+ and coroots Φ∨
+. We assume B∨
Z
to be chosen such that the coroots whose root subgroups are contained in B∨
Z
correspond to the negative coroots −Φ∨
+. For a ﬁeld k of characteristic p > 0,
we denote by T ∨⊆B∨⊆G∨the algebraic group schemes over k obtained from
T ∨
Z ⊆B∨
Z ⊆G∨
Z via extension of scalars. For simplicity, we will assume G∨
to be almost simple, semi-simple, simply-connected and k to be algebraically
closed. Our main reference for this section is [Jan03]. An excellent survey over
the theory with a slightly diﬀerent focus can be found in [Wil17a, §1].
This setting will allow us to relate the tensor ideals of tilting modules for
G∨to p-cells in the aﬃne Weyl group W. Even though our exposition makes
the notation more complicated, we hope that it is less confusing to introduce
the notions in the setting in which we need them. Let us start by introducing
the geometric realization of the aﬃne Weyl group.
We denote by
X∨
+ := {λ ∈X∨| ⟨λ, α⟩⩾0 for all α ∈Φ+}
the set of dominant coweights. Similarly X+ denotes the set of dominant weights.
6.1
Geometric Realization of the Aﬃne Weyl Group
We will need the geometric realization of the aﬃne Weyl group. All results in
this section are classical and can be found in [Bou68, Chapter V, §3], [Kan01,
Chapter 11] and [IM65].
For this deﬁne E := X∨⊗R where X∨is the cocharacter lattice we used as
input datum. The aﬃne Weyl group W = Wf ⋉ZΦ∨can be realized as aﬃne
transformations on E where ZΦ∨acts by translations and Wf acts linearly (see
Section 2.1). Denote by tλ the translation by λ ∈ZΦ∨. The lattice ZΦ∨is
invariant under the action of W. It follows that W is also generated by all aﬃne
reﬂections of the form
sα∨,m(λ) := λ −(⟨λ, α⟩−m)α∨
for α ∈Φ+ and m ∈Z as tmα∨= sα∨,m ◦sα∨,0. Observe that sα∨,m ﬁxes the
hyperplane Hα∨,m = {e ∈E | ⟨e, α⟩= m}. The connected components of
E \
[
α∈Φ+,n∈Z
Hα∨,n
are called alcoves. An example of an alcove is
A0 = {λ ∈E | 0 < ⟨λ, α⟩< 1 for all α ∈Φ+} ⊆E,
called the fundamental alcove. For an alcove A, we call the subset of all points
in A with a ﬁxed stabilizer in W a facet. It follows that each facet is open in its


PDF PAGE 70
64
6
TILTING MODULES AND MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS
closure and that A is a disjoint union of facets. The facets of codimension 1 of
A are called walls. The aﬃne reﬂections in those hyperplanes that intersect A0
in the walls of A0 give the set of simple reﬂections S realizing W as a Coxeter
Group. We have
S = {sα∨,0 | α ∈∆} ∪{sα∨
0 ,1}
where α0 ∈Φ+ is the highest root, so the aﬃne reﬂection coincides with tα∨
0 ◦
sα∨
0 ,0 and ﬁxes the hyperplane Hα∨
0 ,1 (see [IM65, §1.4]).The group W acts simply
transitively on the set of alcoves (see [IM65, Proposition 1.2]). Therefore, we
may colour the walls of any alcove by an element in S in such a way that the
action of W on E preserves the wall colours.
A point v ∈E is called special if there are ν = |Φ+| hyperplanes in
{Hα∨,m | α ∈Φ+, m ∈Z} passing through v.
Note that the origin 0 is a
special point. The following lemma follows immediately from the deﬁnitions
and shows that the assumption G∨simply-connected ensures that every special
point lies in X∨:
Lemma 6.1. For a point v ∈E the following conditions are equivalent:
(i) v is special.
(ii) ⟨v, α⟩∈Z for all α ∈∆.
(iii) v ∈L
α∈∆Zω∨
α where {ω∨
α | α ∈∆} are the fundamental coweights (i.e.
the dual basis to ∆of ZΦ).
Therefore, the action of W ext on E gives the following bijections:
W ext/Wf
∼
←→
X∨
∼
←→{special vertices in E}
wWf
←→w(0)
←→
w(0)
Wf\W ext/Wf
∼
←→
X∨
+
∼
←→{special vertices in X∨
+ ⊗Z R⩾0}
The deﬁnition of a spherical element from Section 7.4 can be reformulated as
follows: An element w ∈W is called spherical if there exist special vertices
v, ˜v ∈E such that L(w) = Sv and R(w) = S˜v.
Let C0 := {e ∈E | ⟨e, α⟩> 0 for all α ∈Φ+} be the dominant cone. For any
special point v ∈E let Cv be the unique cone such that Cv is a translate of C0
with v as vertex (i.e. extremal point). Let Av be the unique alcove contained
in Cv with closure containing v. The connected components of
E \
[
α∈∆,n∈Z
Hα∨,n
are called boxes. Let Πv be the unique box containing Av.
In addition to the left action of W on the set of alcove induced by the
continuous action of W on E, there is another action of W on the set of alcoves:
For s ∈W and A an arbitrary alcove, denote by As the alcove whose closure
shares an s-coloured wall with the closure of A. Denote by (Wv, Sv) the standard
parabolic subgroup of the aﬃne Weyl group W that leaves the set of alcoves
with v in their closure invariant under the right action. Observe that Wv is
isomorphic to the ﬁnite Weyl group and let wv be its longest element.
For
example w0 is the longest element in the ﬁnite Weyl group W0 = Wf.


PDF PAGE 71
6.2
More Notation
65
The extended aﬃne Weyl group W ext = Wf ⋉X∨can also be realized as a
subgroup of aﬃne transformations on E where again X∨acts by translations
and Wf acts linearly. The lattice X∨is invariant under the action of W ext. The
group W ext has a length function l : W ext →Z⩾0 given by:
l(x) = |{Hα∨,n | Hα∨,n separates A0 from xA0 for α ∈Φ+, n ∈Z}|
Since W is a subgroup in W ext, this length function can be restricted to W and
one can check that it coincides with the length function given by the minimal
number of simple reﬂections needed to express an element of W (see [IM65,
§1.5]). Consider the set of length zero elements:
Ω:= {w ∈W ext | l(w) = 0} = {w ∈W ext | wA0 = A0}
Since W acts simply transitively on the set of alcoves, we see that W ext =
Ω⋉W. This implies that Ωis isomorphic to X∨/ZΦ∨and the corresponding
diagonalizable group sceme is isomorphic to the center of G∨(see [Jan03, Part
II, §1.6]). In order to shed some light on the mysterious length zero elements,
we want to summarize the most important results about Ω. First, we have a
nice parametrization of Ωgiven in [IM65, Proposition 1.8]:
Proposition 6.2. The set {0}∪{ω∨
α | α ∈∆and ⟨ω∨
α, α0⟩= 1} maps bijectively
to Ωvia 0 7→1, ω∨
α 7→tω∨
α vαw0 where vα is the longest element in the parabolic
subgroup of (Wf, Sf) generated by {sβ∨,0 | β ∈∆\ {α}}.
Since the set {0} ∪{ω∨
α | α ∈∆and ⟨ω∨
α, α0⟩= 1} is precisely the set of ele-
ments in the intersection of A0 with the coweight lattice (see [IM65, Proposition
1.17]), the following result follows from the last proposition and Lemma 6.1:
Corollary 6.3. The order of Ωis the number of special points in A0.
The following result describes the action of Ωon W by conjugation (see
[IM65, §1.8]) and will be quite important for us:
Proposition 6.4. The action of σ ∈Ωon W given by w 7→σwσ−1 preserves
the set of simple reﬂections S and is given by an automorphism of the aﬃne
Dynkin diagram which is realized as the Dynkin diagram of {−α0}∪{α | α ∈∆}.
The element tω∨
α vαw0 ∈Ωmaps the aﬃne reﬂection sα∨
0 ,1 to sα∨,0.
6.2
More Notation
Set ρ := 1
2
P
α∨∈Φ∨
+ α∨. In the representation theory of G∨in characteristic p
it is necessary to dilate the action of the aﬃne Weyl group by p and shift the
origin to −ρ. For this reason, we consider the p-dilated dot action of W on X∨
deﬁned for µ ∈X∨via
x ·p µ := x(µ + ρ) −ρ for x ∈W and
(14)
tλ ·p µ := µ + pλ for λ ∈ZΦ∨.
(15)
A fundamental domain for the p-dilated dot action of aﬃne Weyl group on
X∨is given by the closure of:
Cp = {λ ∈X∨| 0 < ⟨λ + ρ, α⟩< p for all α ∈Φ+}


PDF PAGE 72
66
6
TILTING MODULES AND MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS
We deﬁne facets of Cp as in Section 6.1 using the p-dilated dot action of W (see
[Jan03, Part II §6.2] for an equivalent deﬁnition). Denote the pr-fundamental
box by
X∨
pr := {λ ∈X∨
+ | ⟨λ, α⟩< pr for all α ∈∆}.
The elements of X∨
pr are called pr-restricted coweights (resp.
pr-restricted
weights for G∨).
When expressing an element of X∨
pr in the fundamental
coweights, all coeﬃcients are < pr.
Set h = max{⟨ρ, α⟩| α ∈Φ+} + 1. Since our coroot system is assumed to
be indecomposable, h coincides with its Coxeter number.
The weight (pr −1)ρ for r ∈N is called the r-th Steinberg weight for G∨.
Since G∨is assumed to be simply-connected, we have (pr −1)ρ ∈X∨. For r ∈N
deﬁne Yr := (pr −1)ρ + X∨
+ to be the cone of dominant coweights shifted by the
r-th Steinberg weight. Any λ ∈Yr can be uniquely written as λ = λ0 + prλ1
with λ0 ∈(pr −1)ρ + X∨
pr and λ1 ∈X∨
+.
Since G∨has an Fp-structure (as it even arises from G∨
Z through base
change), we can view the Frobenius F as an endomorphism of G∨(see [Jan03,
Part I, §9.2]). Denote by G∨
r the kernel of F r. The normal subgroup functor
G∨
r is called the r-th Frobenius kernel. For a G∨-module M, denote by M [r] its
r-th Frobenius twist.
To each dominant coweight λ ∈X∨
+ we can associate an induced repre-
sentation ∇(λ) := indG∨
B∨kλ.
Its dual ∆(λ) is called the Weyl module with
highest weight λ. We also have a simple module L(λ) sitting in the sequence
∆(λ) ↠L(λ) ,→∇(λ) given by projection to the head and inclusion of the
socle. Moreover, the set {L(λ) | λ ∈X∨
+} gives a complete set of representatives
for the isomorphism classes of simple, rational G∨-modules (see [Jan03, Part II,
Corollary 2.7]). The category Rep(G∨) of rational representations of G∨forms a
highest-weight category. Its standard (resp. costandard) modules are the Weyl
(resp. induced) modules.
6.3
Tilting Modules
In this section, we will collect the most important results about tilting modules.
The main sources for this are [Don93; And98] and [Jan03, Part II, §E].
A rational representation of G∨is called tilting if it admits two ﬁltrations, one
with successive quotients isomorphic to Weyl modules and the other one with
successive quotients isomorphic to induced modules. We denote by Tilt(G∨)
the full subcategory of tilting modules in Rep(G∨). The following vanishing
statement is fundamental to the theory of tilting modules (see [Jan03, Part II,
Proposition 4.13]):
Proposition 6.5. For λ, µ ∈X∨
+ we have:
Exti
G∨(∆(λ), ∇(µ)) =
(
k
if i = 0 and λ = µ,
0
otherwise.
Without explicit mention we will often use the following result (see [Jan03,
Part II, Lemma E.6]):
Lemma 6.6. Tilt(G∨) is a k-linear Krull-Schmidt category.


PDF PAGE 73
6.3
Tilting Modules
67
In [Don93, Theorem 1.1] Donkin classiﬁes indecomposable tilting modules
for G∨:
Theorem 6.7. For each λ ∈X∨
+ there exists up to isomorphism a unique
indecomposable tilting module T(λ) of highest weight λ.
Moreover, λ occurs
with multiplicity one as a weight of T(λ). Every indecomposable tilting module
is isomorphic to T(λ) for some λ ∈X∨
+.
The following diﬃcult result shows that the category of tilting modules is
monoidal (see [Mat90] for a proof using Frobenius splitting techniques):
Theorem 6.8. If Q1 and Q2 are tilting modules, then so is Q1 ⊗Q2.
The strong linkage principle implies that we know the characters of the
tilting modules with highest weight in Cp:
Lemma 6.9. For all λ ∈Cp ∩X∨
+ we have:
T(λ) = L(λ) = ∆(λ) = ∇(λ)
Donkin’s tilting tensor product theorem (see [Don93, Proposition 2.1]) will
have important consequences for p-cells:
Proposition 6.10. Suppose p ⩾2h −2 and n ∈N \ {0}. Write λ ∈Yn as
λ = λ0 + pnλ1 with λ0 ∈(pn −1)ρ + X∨
pn and λ1 ∈X∨
+. Then the following
holds:
T(λ) ∼= T(λ0) ⊗T(λ1)(n)
For a semi-simple, simply-connected algebraic group, its weight and charac-
ter lattice coincide. Thus, all the fundamental coweights ω∨
i lie in X∨. Write a
dominant weight λ ∈Y1 as a sum P
i aiω∨
i with ai ∈Z⩾0. Then consider for all
i the twisted p-adic decompostion ai = Pmi
j=0 ai,jpj where p −1 ⩽ai,j ⩽2p −2
for all 0 ⩽j < mi, 0 ⩽ai,mi ⩽p −1 and mi minimal for all i (see [EH02,
Lemma 5]). Let m (resp. M) be the minimum (resp. maximum) of all mi’s.
Set λl := P
i ai,lω∨
i for all l < m and λm = P
i(PM
l=m pl−mai,l)ω∨
i where ai,l = 0
for l > mi. Then we have
λ =
m
X
l=0
plλl
and
X
0⩽l<r
plλl ∈(pr −1)ρ + X∨
pr for all r ⩽m
as pr −1 ⩽⟨P
0⩽l<r plλl, α⟩⩽2pr −2 for all simple roots α ∈∆. Observe that
λm lies in X∨
+ \ Y1 and thus within a p-strip of the walls of the dominant cone.
In this situation we may successively apply Proposition 6.10 to get:
Corollary 6.11. Under the same assumptions as in Proposition 6.10, for a
dominant weight λ ∈Y1 write λ = Pm
l=0 plλl as above. Then we have:
T(λ) =
m
O
l=0
T(λl)(l)
Observe also that Donkin’s tilting tensor product theorem does not make
any statement about the indecomposable tilting modules with highest weight
in X∨
+ \ Y1 (i.e. those weights which lie too close to the walls of the dominant


PDF PAGE 74
68
6
TILTING MODULES AND MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS
cone). It follows that if the characters of the indecomposable tilting modules
with highest weight in X∨
+ \ Y1 ∪(p −1)ρ + X∨
p are known, then one can deduce
all indecomposable tilting characters.
The following deﬁnition is taken from [Jan80, §4.2]:
Deﬁnition 6.12. A weight µ ∈X∨is called pr-bounded if µ satisﬁes
⟨µ, α⟩< 2pr(h −1)
for all α ∈Φ ∩X+. A G∨-module N is called pr-bounded if each weight µ of N
is pr-bounded.
For Section 8 we will need the following result from [And98, Proposition 2.6]:
Proposition 6.13. Suppose p ⩾2h −2. For λ ∈X∨
p and µ ∈X∨
+ p-bounded
we have:
[∆(µ) : L(λ)] = [T(eλ) : ∆(µ)]
where eλ = 2(p −1)ρ + w0λ and w0 ∈Wf is the longest element.
6.4
Steinberg Modules
For r ∈N the simple, rational G∨-module with the r-th Steinberg weight as
heighest weight is called the r-th Steinberg module and denoted by:
Str := L((pr −1)ρ)
The following result can be found in [Jan03, Part II, Proposition 3.19]:
Proposition 6.14. For every B∨-module M and i ∈N we have an isomor-
phism:
Hi((pr −1)ρ ⊗M [r]) ∼= Str ⊗Hi(M)[r]
By setting M = k, i = 0 and using H0(k) = k we get the ﬁrst equality in
the following corollary, which in turn implies the others:
Corollary 6.15. The following holds:
Str = ∇((pr −1)ρ) = ∆((pr −1)ρ) = T((pr −1)ρ)
In particular, Str is self-dual and lies in Tilt(G∨).
Corollary 6.16. Str is a direct summand of Str ⊗Str ⊗Str.
Proof. Recall that in a k-linear, rigid, symmetric monoidal category C for every
object c ∈C there exists an object c∨∈C, called the dual, together with maps
evc : c∨⊗c →k and coevc : k →c ⊗c∨such that the composition
c
coev ⊗c
−→
c ⊗c∨⊗c
c⊗ev
−→c
gives the identity on c. Since Str is self-dual, we have an isomorphism ϕ : St∨
r →
Str. Deﬁne:
ι = Str ⊗ϕ ⊗Str ◦coev ⊗Str :
Str
→Str⊗Str ⊗Str
pr = Str ⊗ev ◦Str ⊗ϕ−1 ⊗Str : Str⊗Str ⊗Str →
Str
Now ι and pr obviously realize Str as a direct summand of Str ⊗Str ⊗Str.


PDF PAGE 75
6.5
Translation Functors
69
By Weyl’s dimension formula we get the following result:
Lemma 6.17. The dimension of Str is prN where N = |Φ∨
+| is the number of
positive roots.
The character of the Steinberg modules can also be computed using Weyl’s
character formula:
Lemma 6.18. The character of Str is given by
ch Str = e(pr−1)ρ Y
α∈Φ∨
+
1 −e−prα
1 −e−α .
We are interested in the tensor ideals of tilting modules for G∨. For this, it
will be important to know whether Str is injective and projective for the l-th
Frobenius kernel G∨
l . Combining [Jan03, Part II, Lemma 9.4 and Lemma E.8]
we get an answer to this question:
Lemma 6.19. Let λ ∈X∨
+ and r ∈N \ {0}.
Then T(λ) is projective and
injective for G∨
r if and only if ⟨λ, α⟩⩾pr −1 for all simple roots α ∈∆.
Corollary 6.20. The following holds: Str is projective and injective for G∨
l if
and only if 1 ⩽l ⩽r.
In general, injective G∨-modules live in a ind-completion of Rep(G∨). In
order to bypass this diﬃculty one usually truncates Rep(G∨) suitably. We want
to ﬁnd a full subcategory of Rep(G∨) in which the r-th Steinberg module Str
is injective. Combining the results in [Jan03, Part II, §11.11 and §E.9] (or in
[Jan80, §4.4-4.5] as explained in [Don93, §2 Example 1]) we get:
Lemma 6.21. Assume p ⩾2h −2. Then for all λ ∈X∨
pr the indecomposable
tilting module T(2(pr −1)ρ + ω0λ) is injective among the pr-bounded modules
where ω0 denotes the longest element in the Weyl group of G∨.
Corollary 6.22. Str is injective among the pr-bounded modules.
6.5
Translation Functors
In this section, we brieﬂy introduce translation functors and recall the most
important results about them.
For a subset b ⊂X+ denote by Rep(G∨)b the full subcategory of all ratio-
nal G∨-modules whose composition factors are indexed by elements in b. The
following well-known result shows that Rep(G∨)W·pλ is a direct sum of blocks
of Rep(G∨) (see [Jan03, Part II, Corollary 6.17]):
Theorem 6.23 (The Linkage Principle).
Let λ, µ ∈X+ be two dominant weights. If Ext1
G∨(L(λ), L(µ)) is non-zero, then
µ ∈W ·p µ.
For λ ∈Cp denote by prλ (resp. inclλ) the projection to (resp. inclusion of)
the subcategory Rep(G∨)W·pλ ⊂Rep(G∨). For λ, µ ∈Cp there exists a unique
dominant weight ν ∈W(µ −λ) ∩X∨
+. The translation functor
T µ
λ : Rep(G∨)W·pλ →Rep(G∨)W·pµ


PDF PAGE 76
70
6
TILTING MODULES AND MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS
is deﬁned via
T µ
λ := prµ(T(ν) ⊗inclλ(−)).
Note that we obtain an isomorphic functor if we replace T(ν) by any G∨-module
whose extremal weights are W(µ −λ) (see [Jan03, Part II, §7.6, Remark 1)]).
One of the ﬁrst result about translation functors is the following (see [Jan03,
Part II, Lemma 7.6]):
Lemma 6.24. For λ, µ ∈Cp we have:
(i) The functor T µ
λ is exact.
(ii) The functors T µ
λ and T λ
µ are adjoint to each other.
One of the most important results about translation functors is the “trans-
lation principle” (see [Jan03, Part II, Proposition 7.9]):
Proposition 6.25. Suppose that λ, µ ∈Cp belong to the same facet. Then
T λ
µ induces an equivalence of categories Rep(G∨)W·pµ →Rep(G∨)W·pλ. The
functor T λ
µ ◦T µ
λ is isomorphic to prλ.
The following result from [Jan03, Part II, Proposition E.11] describes how
translation functors act on tilting modules:
Proposition 6.26. Let λ, µ ∈Cp be such that µ belongs to the closure of the
facet of λ. Let w ∈W be such that w ·p µ ∈X∨
+ and such that w ·p λ is maximal
among all wx ·p λ with x ∈StabW·p(µ). Then the following holds:
(i) T λ
µ T(w ·p µ) ∼= T(w ·p λ)
(ii) T µ
λ T(w ·p λ) ∼= Ll
i=1 T(w ·p λ) where l = (StabW·p(µ) : StabW·p(λ))
6.6
Modular Weight Cells
We will assume in this section p ⩾h. This ensures that 0 ∈Cp and thus Cp is
non-empty (see [Jan03, Part II, §6.1 (8)]).
Deﬁnition 6.27. Let λ, µ ∈X∨
+. We write λ
p
⩽
T
µ if there exists a tilting
module Q ∈Tilt(G∨) such that T(λ) is a direct summand in T(µ) ⊗Q. If both
λ
p
⩽
T µ and µ
p
⩽
T λ hold, then we write λ
p∼
T µ. The equivalence classes for
p∼
T
are called modular weight cells (after [And04] and [Ost01]).
Any alcove C with respect to the p-dilated dot action of the aﬃne Weyl
group consists of all weights λ ∈X∨satisfying a family of inequalities of the
form nαp < ⟨λ+ρ, α⟩< (nα +1)p for α ∈Φ+. Denote the set of weights λ ∈X∨
such that nαp ⩽⟨λ + ρ, α⟩< (nα + 1)p holds for all α ∈Φ+ by ⩽C. This set is
called the lower closure of C. Combining Proposition 6.25 and Proposition 6.26
it is easy to see that the set
{⩽C | C alcove w.r.t. the p-dilated dot action of W with C ∩X+ ̸= ∅}
gives a reﬁnement of modular weight cells (see [AHR17, Lemma 7.6] and [And04,
§4]):


PDF PAGE 77
6.6
Modular Weight Cells
71
Lemma 6.28. If λ, µ ∈X∨
+ belong to the lower closure of the same alcove, then
λ
p∼
T µ. In particular, each modular weight cell is a union of lower closures of
alcoves for the dot-action of the p-dilated aﬃne Weyl group intersected with X∨
+.
The deﬁnition of translation functors immediately implies the following re-
sult:
Lemma 6.29. For λ, µ ∈Cp and w, w′ ∈W we have:
T(w′ ·p µ)
⊕
⊆T µ
λ T(w ·p λ) ⇒w′ ·p µ
p
⩽
T w ·p λ
The following result gives the ﬁrst example of a modular weight cell. It can
be deduced from results in [AP95, §2] or [GM94]:
Proposition 6.30. For p ⩾h the set Cp is a modular weight cell, more precisely
the highest one with respect to the preorder
p
⩽
T .
Proof. Recall that the assumption p ⩾h assures that 0 lies in Cp. We want to
show that for any λ ∈Cp we have T(0)
⊕
⊆T(λ)∨⊗T(λ). Since Rep(G∨) is a
rigid, symmetric monoidal category, we have maps coevT (λ) : k →T(λ)⊗T(λ)∨,
evT (λ) : T(λ)∨⊗T(λ) →k and the dimension of T(λ) can be calculated as follows
(see [Eti+15, Proposition 8.10.14]):
k
coevT (λ)
−→
T(λ) ⊗T(λ)∨∼= T(λ)∨⊗T(λ)
evT (λ)
−→k
[AHR17, Proposition 7.9] shows that for λ ∈X∨
+ the dimension of T(λ) is not
divisible by p if and only if λ lies in Cp. Therefore the composition above is
non-zero and realizes k as a direct summand of T(λ)∨⊗T(λ). It follows that Cp
is contained in a modular weight cell. [GM94, Lemma 2.7] reads in our setting
as follows:
Lemma 6.31. Let M, N ∈Rep(G∨). Assume that M is indecomposable and of
dimension divisible by p. Then the dimension of any direct summand of M ⊗N
is divisible by p.
Combining this result with [AHR17, Proposition 7.9] gives us that Cp is a
modular weight cell. Since 0 ∈Cp corresponds to the trivial module, it is clear
that Cp is the highest modular weight cell with respect to
p
⩽
T .
Lemma 6.32. There are inﬁnitely many modular weight cells.
Proof. From Corollary 6.20 it follows that Str+1 is injective for the (r + 1)-
th Frobenius kernel G∨
r+1 of G∨, but Str is not. Therefore Str cannot be a
direct summand of Str+1 ⊗Q for some tilting module Q ∈Tilt(G) as all direct
summands of Str+1 ⊗Q are injective G∨
r+1-modules. This implies
(pr+1 −1)ρ
p<
T (pr −1)ρ.


PDF PAGE 78
72
6
TILTING MODULES AND MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS
Remark 6.33. In [Lus87, Theorem 2.2] Lusztig shows that there are only ﬁnitely
many Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells in aﬃne Weyl groups. As soon as we have es-
tablished a connection between modular weight cells and right p-cells, it follows
from the last result that aﬃne Weyl groups have inﬁnitely many right p-cells
for p ⩾h.
As a corollary to the proof and Lemma 6.19 we get:
Corollary 6.34. Let λ ∈X∨
+ and Q be a tilting module for G∨. If T(λ) is a
direct summand in Str ⊗Q, then λ lies in (pr −1)ρ + X∨
+.
6.7
Fractal-Like Structure of Modular Weight Cells
In this section, we will explain the beautiful fractal-like structure of modular
weight cells. The proof is due to Andersen (see [And04, §4]) and based on the
tilting tensor product theorem (see Proposition 6.10). As in the tilting tensor
product theorem, we write λ ∈Yr as λ = λ0 + prλ1 with λ0 ∈(pr −1)ρ + X∨
pr
and λ1 ∈X∨
+.
Lemma 6.35. Assume p ⩾2h −2. For λ, µ ∈Yr we have:
λ
p
⩽
T µ if and only if λ1
p
⩽
T µ1.
Proof. First, we show that λ0
p∼
T (pr −1)ρ. For all ν1, ν2 ∈X∨
+ we know that
T(ν1 + ν2) is a direct summand of T(ν1) ⊗T(ν2) and thus ν1 + ν2
p
⩽
T
ν1. In
particular, we have λ0
p
⩽
T (pr −1)ρ. To see that the other inequality also holds,
recall that under the assumption p ⩾2h−2 the Steinberg module Str is injective
among G∨-modules with highest weight in C2pr(h−1) (see Corollary 6.22). Write
λ0 = (pr −1)ρ + ν for some ν ∈X∨
pr. Since Str is simple, it is enough to check
that there is a non-zero G∨-module homomorphism from Str to T(λ0) ⊗T(ν).
As tilting modules are self-dual, we have by the deﬁnition of ν:
HomG∨(Str, T(λ0) ⊗T(ν)) ∼= HomG∨(Str ⊗T(ν), T(λ0)) ̸= 0
This ﬁnishes the proof of λ0
p∼
T (pr −1)ρ.
Next, we claim that we may assume λ0 = (pr −1)ρ = µ0. Indeed, recall the
tilting tensor product theorem which gives us for p ⩾2h −2:
T(λ) ∼= T(λ0) ⊗T(λ1)(r)
where (−)(r) denotes the r-th Frobenius twist. From this we deduce
λ
p∼
T (pr −1)ρ + prλ1.
Finally, we prove the claim of the lemma.
⇐Suppose that T(λ1) occurs as a direct summand of T(µ1) ⊗Q for some
tilting module Q ∈Tilt(G∨). Then T(λ) ∼= Str ⊗T(λ1)(r) is a direct
summand of Str ⊗T(µ1)(r) ⊗Q(r). Using the fact that Str is a summand


PDF PAGE 79
6.7
Fractal-Like Structure of Modular Weight Cells
73
of Str ⊗Str ⊗Str (see Corollary 6.16) we see that Str ⊗T(µ1)(r) ⊗Q(r)
and thus T(λ) is a direct summand of
Str ⊗T(µ1)(r)
|
{z
}
T (µ)
⊗Str ⊗Str ⊗Q(r)
|
{z
}
∈Tilt(G∨)
.
⇒Suppose that T(λ) is a direct summand of T(µ) ⊗Q for some tilting
module Q ∈Tilt(G∨).
First consider Str ⊗Q.
By Corollary 6.34 all
indecomposable direct summands of this tilting module are indexed by
elements in Yr. By the tilting tensor product theorem we have:
T(µ) ⊗Q ∼=
M
ν∈Yr
(T(ν0) ⊗(T(µ1) ⊗T(ν1))(r))⊕cν
for suitable cν ∈N almost all of which are 0. Since T(λ) ∼= Str ⊗T(λ1)(r)
occurs as a direct summand of a term on the right hand side, there has
to be an element ν ∈Yr such that cν > 0, ν0 = (pr −1)ρ and T(λ1) is a
direct summand of T(µ1) ⊗T(ν1). This implies λ1
p
⩽
T µ1.
The last result together with Proposition 6.30 gives us:
Proposition 6.36. For each r ∈N the ﬁnite set cr
1 := (pr −1)ρ + X∨
pr + prCp
is a modular weight cell.
Moreover, Lemma 6.35 reduces the description of all modular weight cells in
X+ to the problem of decomposing Y1 \ Cp into modular weight cells.
The modular weight cell c0
1 = Cp gives rise to a rigid, symmetric monoidal
category with fusion rule described in [AP95, Proposition 2.10] and [GM94,
Theorem 4.10].


PDF PAGE 80
74
7
MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS AND P-CELLS
7
Modular Weight Cells and p-Cells
In this section we will recall some results about the (anti-)spherical module for
the aﬃne Hecke algebra. References for this section are [Soe97b] and [Deo87].
We continue to work in the setting of Section 6 and preserve the additional
assumptions made there as well. In particular, H denotes the Hecke algebra
associated to the aﬃne Weyl group (W, S) (as introduced in Section 6.1).
Denote by Hf = H(Wf,Sf) ⊂H the Hecke algebra of the ﬁnite Weyl group
(Wf, Sf). Set L = Z[v, v−1]. Let fW be the set of representatives of minimal
lengths of the cosets Wf\W. Denote by w0 the longest element in Wf.
Recall the quadratic relation (Hs + v)(Hs −v−1) = 0 in the Hecke algebra.
Thus for u ∈{−v, v−1} we may deﬁne a surjection of L-algebras φu : Hf ↠L
via Hs 7→u for all s ∈Sf. The morphism φu turns L into a Hf-module which
will be denoted by L(u). Observe that L(v−1) (resp. L(−v)) is a deformation
of the trivial (resp. sign) representation of Wf.
Deﬁne the spherical (right) module M and the anti-spherical (right) module
N for the Hecke algebra H as follows:
M = L(v−1) ⊗Hf H
N = L(−v) ⊗Hf H
One may deﬁne a bar involution on M and N via f ⊗H 7→f ⊗H. M
comes equipped with a standard basis {Mx := 1⊗Hx | x ∈fW}, and a Kazhdan-
Lusztig basis {M x | x ∈fW} (see [Soe97b, Theorem 3.1]). Similarly for N using
the notation Nx, N x respectively.
7.1
The p-Canonical Basis of M and Its Categoriﬁcation
There exists an embedding of Hf-modules L(v−1) ,→Hf deﬁned by 1 7→Hw0
(which is well-deﬁned due to the multiplication formula for the Kazhdan-Lusztig
basis). This induces an embedding of right H-modules η : M ,→H which is
compatible with the (−) operator. Due to Hw0 = P
y⩽w0 vl(w0)−l(y)Hy we get
(see [Soe97b, Proposition 3.4]):
η(Mx) =
X
y∈Wf
vl(w0)−l(y)Hyx
η(M x) = Hw0x
where, for the second equality, one uses the characterization of M x as the unique
self-dual element in Mx + P
y⩽x vZ[v]My and similarly in H.
Recall that any element w ∈W with Sf ⊆L(w) can be written as w = w0 ew
with ew ∈fW. It follows from Proposition 3.10(v) that
pHw0x =
X
y⩽x
pmw0y,w0xHw0y
lies completely in the image of η. Therefore, we deﬁne the p-canonical basis of
M via
pM x := η−1(pHw0x)


PDF PAGE 81
7.2
The p-Canonical Basis of N and Its Categoriﬁcation
75
for all x ∈fW. If follows from η(M x) = Hw0x that we have for all x, y ∈fW:
pM x =
X
y⩽x
pmw0y,w0xM y.
The image of η in H suggests the following categoriﬁcation of M. Denote
by kM the full additive subcategory of kH generated by all indecomposable
objects kBw0x(n) for x ∈W such that l(w0x) = l(w0) + l(x) and n ∈Z. Then
kM is naturally a right kH-module category where any indecomposable object
kBx simply acts via (−) ⊗kBx. Since we will not use the following result, we
omit its proof.
Lemma 7.1. kM
∼
→M via [kBw0x] 7→M x for x ∈fW as right H-modules.
7.2
The p-Canonical Basis of N and Its Categoriﬁcation
Consider the canonical quotient map of right H-modules ζ : H ↠N given by
h 7→1 ⊗h. The map ζ is compatible with the (−) operator. One can checks
that the following holds (see [Soe97b, Proposition 3.4]):
ζ(Hyx) = (−v)l(y)Nx for y ∈Wf, x ∈fW
ζ(Hx) =
(
N x
if x ∈fW
0
otherwise.
For the last equality one uses:
(i) the characterization of the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis elements N x as the
unique self-dual element in Nx + P
y⩽x vZ[v]Ny and similarly for Hx,
(ii) for y ⩽x and s ∈L(x) ∩L(y), the relation hsy,x = vhy,x as well as the
equivalence sy ⩽x ⇔y ⩽x.
For s ∈S and w ∈fW we have (see [Soe97b, §3]):
Nw · Hs =







Nws + vNw
if ws ∈fW and ws > w,
Nws + v−1Nw
if ws ∈fW and ws < w,
0
otherwise.
We deﬁne the p-canonical basis for N as follows:
pN x := ζ(pHx) = 1 ⊗pHx for all x ∈fW.
Therefore we get:
pN x =
X
y⩽x
y∈f W
pmy,xN y.
Write pny,x for the coeﬃcient of Ny when expressing pN x in terms of the
standard basis.
As for the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis we obtain using Proposi-
tion 3.10(v) (see [AHR17, Lemma 5.8]):
Lemma 7.2. For x ̸∈fW we have ζ(pHx) = 0.


PDF PAGE 82
76
7
MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS AND P-CELLS
The surjection ζ suggests the following categoriﬁcation of N . Denote by kN
the quotient of kH by the two-sided ideal of all morphisms factoring through a
ﬁnite direct sum of indecomposable objects of the form kBx(n) for x ̸∈fW and
n ∈Z. Then kN is naturally a right kH-module category where any indecom-
posable object kBx simply acts via (−) ⊗kBx. By deﬁnition the diagrammatic
character factors as follows:
[kH]
ch
∼
/

H

[kN]
ch
/ N
Then the following lemma is easy to verify:
Lemma 7.3. ch : kN
∼
→N via [kBx] 7→N x for x ∈fW as right H-modules.
Denote by kNdeg the degrading of kN, i.e. the category on the same objects
as kN but with morphisms for X, Y ∈kN given by:
HomkNdeg(X, Y ) :=
M
n∈Z
HomkN(X, Y (n)).
Let λ0 ∈Cp and consider Rep0(G∨), the regular block of the category of rational
G∨-modules corresponding to λ0. Recall that h is the Coxeter number of G∨.
We refer the reader to [RW16, §3.2 and §3.5] for the deﬁnition of wall-crossing
functors:
Conjecture 7.4 (Riche-Williamson Conjecture).
The assignment of kBs to a wall crossing functor Ξs for s ∈S induces a cate-
gorical action of kH on Rep0(G∨).
Actually, this is not the precise form of the conjecture, but it nonetheless
captures its spirit. For a precise formulation the reader is referred to [RW16,
Conjecture 5.1]. The Riche-Williamson conjecture has the following important
consequences for us (see [RW16, Theorem 1.2]):
Theorem 7.5. Suppose that the Riche-Williamson conjecture holds. Then there
is an equivalence of k-linear right kH-module categories:
kNdeg
∼
−→Tilt0(G∨)
which sends kBw to T(w ·p λ0) for any w ∈fW where ·p denotes the p-dilated
dot action of W on X∨.
Theorem 7.5 has the following important corollary, a character formula for
indecomposable tilting modules:
Theorem 7.6. For p > h and x, y ∈fW we have:
[T (x ·p λ0) : ∇(y ·p λ0)] = pny,x(1)
Recently, Achar, Makisumi, Riche and Williamson proved Theorem 7.6 in
[Ach+17a] and [Ach+17b].
It follows that the p-canonical basis of N gives
all tilting characters of G∨. The Riche-Williamson conjecture remains open in
types other than A.


PDF PAGE 83
7.3
Anti-spherical Light Leaves and Soergel’s Hom-Formula
77
Remark 7.7. In the papers [RW16] and [Ach+17b] a more general setting is used.
G∨is allowed to be a connected reductive group over k with simply-connected
derived subgroup (for example GLn).
Lemma 4.4 shows that fW decomposes into right p-cells (see also [AHR17,
Lemma 5.6]). The right p-cells contained in fW are called anti-spherical (or
canonical in the terminology of [LX88]). Following along the lines of [Ost97],
Achar, Hardesty and Riche use the new character formulas for tilting modules
to establish a link between anti-spherical p-cells and modular weight cells (see
[AHR17, Theorem 7.7]) which we will use frequently:
Theorem 7.8. For p > h and x, y ∈fW we have:
x ·p 0
p
⩽
T y ·p 0 ⇔x
p
⩽
R y
7.3
Anti-spherical Light Leaves and Soergel’s Hom-Formula
In this section, we want to introduce anti-spherical light leaves and state So-
ergel’s Hom-formula for the anti-spherical module.
Deﬁnition 7.9. Given an expression w = (s1, s2, . . . , sn) together with a subex-
pression e, set w0 := e and wk := (w
e⩽k
⩽k )• for 1 ⩽k ⩽n. For a subset K ⊆W
we say that e avoids K if wk−1sk ̸∈K for 1 ⩽k < n.
The following lemma (see [RW16, Lemma 4.1]) gives the characters of the
anti-spherical Bott-Samelson modules and is the counterpart of [EW16, Lemma
2.10] in the anti-spherical setting:
Lemma 7.10. For any expression w = (s1, s2, . . . , sn), we have in N :
N e · Hs1Hs2 . . . Hsn =
X
e subexpression of w
e avoids W\f W
vdf(e)Nwe
Deﬁne RSf := R/⟨αs | s ∈Sf⟩. We claim that the morphism spaces in kN are
left RSf-modules. First, consider any expression w starting in a simple reﬂection
s ∈Sf. Lemma 4.4 implies that the corresponding Bott-Samelson object in kH
decomposes into a direct sum of grading shifts of indecomposable objects Bx
with s ∈L(x). Thus, the image of w is zero in kN. Then recall that multiplying
an S-graph D with a homogeneous polynomial f ∈R from the left is deﬁned
by decorating the leftmost region of D with f. Using the Barbell relation (4)
it follows that multiplying for s ∈Sf an S-graph with αs from the left results
in a morphism that factors through an expression starting in s. Therefore, the
resulting morphism vanishes in kN. This ﬁnishes the proof of the claim.
In the following, we will also call a subexpression e of w that avoids W \ fW
as well as the corresponding light leaf LLe,w anti-spherical.
Proposition 7.11. For any expression w, the graded RSf-module Hom•
kN(w, )
is free. Moreover, we can choose the light leaves morphisms in such a way that
the morphisms
{LLw,e | e anti-spherical subexpression of w expressing e}
give a basis of Hom•
kN(w, ).


PDF PAGE 84
78
7
MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS AND P-CELLS
Proof. In [RW16, Proposition 4.7] Riche and Williamson show that the anti-
spherical light leaves give a spanning set and the proof of [RW16, Theorem
11.13] implies that they are linear independent.
It should be noted that the necessary choices in Proposition 7.11 are limited
to certain braid moves. Since RSf is a principal ideal domain (as a polynomial
ring in one variable over a ﬁeld), direct summands of free modules are free. Thus
Proposition 7.11 implies via adjunction techniques that all Hom-spaces in kN
are free RSf-modules. Therefore, a Z[v, v−1]-semilinear (in the sense of [EW16,
§2.4]) pairing on N is induced by
(ch(B), ch(B′))N = grk Hom•
kN(B, B′)
and it satisﬁes by adjunction (see [RW16, §5.5]) for n, m ∈N :
(n · Hs, m)N = (n, m · Hs)N for all s ∈S.
(16)
Alternatively, we can deﬁne a Z[v, v−1]-bilinear pairing on N via (Nx, Ny) = δx,y
and bilinear extension. From the action described above, it follows that this
pairing also satisﬁes the identity in (16). Therefore, both pairings are uniquely
determined by the values obtained from pairing ch(w) with Ne for arbitrary
expressions w of elements w ∈fW. Proposition 7.11 and Lemma 7.10 show
that both pairings agree on these values as for a subsequence e of w we have
deg(LLw,e) = df(e) and therefore we get for n, m ∈N :
(n, m) = (n, m)N
Corollary 7.12 (Soergel’s Hom-formula for kN). For B, B′ ∈kN we have:
(ch(B), ch B′) = grk Hom•
kN(B, B′)
Theorem 7.13. The set of all double leaves ranging over all w ∈W and pairs
of anti-spherical subsequences e (resp. f) of x (resp. y) both expressing w gives
a basis of the free RSf-module Hom•
kN(x, y).
Sketch of proof. Let w ⩽x ∈fW. Choose an arbitary expression x for x and
a reduced expression w for w. We can extend the proof of [RW16, Proposition
4.7] to see that the anti-spherical light leaves indexed by subsequences e of x
expressing w give a spanning set of Hom•
kN≮w(x, w). Following their proof, we
deduce the analogous statement of [RW16, (4.8)] for morphisms ending in w.
To prove the claim using induction on the path dominance order, we need the
following observation: There is a unique subsequence e of x expressing w whose
decoration consists only of U0’s and U1’s (see [Pat17, Lemma 1.1.3]). It follows
that e is minimal with respect to the path dominance order. If e does not avoid
W \ fW, then we can choose one of the braid moves in the construction of LLx,e
in such a way that it factors through a reduced expression starting in a simple
reﬂection in Sf and thus LLx,e vanishes. Note that any light leaf LLx,f for a
subsequence f of x that is strictly smaller than e in the path dominance order
or that expresses an element < w in the Bruhat order vanishes in N≮w.
By deﬁnition of the diagrammatic character the graded rank of Hom•
kN≮w(x, w)
is the coeﬃcient in front Nw in ch(x) and matches the degrees with multiplic-
ities of the anti-spherical light leaves x →w (see Lemma 7.10). Therefore, the


PDF PAGE 85
7.4
The Geometric Satake and the p-Canonical Basis
79
anti-spherical light leaves give a basis of the free RSf-module Hom•
kN≮w(x, w).
By descending induction on the element w through which the anti-spherical
double leaves factor, we see that the set given in the theorem gives a basis of
Hom•
kN(x, y).
7.4
The Geometric Satake and the p-Canonical Basis
In this section, we will explain the consequences of results about parity sheaves
on the aﬃne Grassmannian for the p-canonical basis.
A very interesting question is under which hypothesis the indecomposable
parity sheaves on the aﬃne Grassmannian are perverse. This is equivalent to
the p-canonical basis being a Z-linear combination of Kazhdan-Lusztig basis
elements. We call an element of H perverse if it is a Z-linear combination of
Kazhdan-Lusztig basis elements.
To shorten our notation, write K := C((t)) and O := C[[t]]. Deﬁne the aﬃne
Grassmannian Gra to be the Z-functor given by R 7→LG(R)/L+G(R).
Its
complex points coincide with G(K)/G(O). For λ ∈X∨denote by tλ ∈G(K)
the image of t ∈K under the following composition
K∗= Gm(K)
λ
−→T(K) ,→G(K).
The Cartan decomposition (see [Zhu16, (2.1.2)])
Gra(C) =
[
λ∈X∨
+
G(O)tλG(O)/G(O)
|
{z
}
Grλ
a:=
gives a stratiﬁcation of Gra(C) where each stratum Grλ
a is a vector bundle over
a partial ﬂag variety G(C)tλG(O)/G(O). Since the G(O)-orbits are all simply-
connected, the indecomposable parity sheaves are all parametrized by λ ∈X∨
+
(see [JMW14b, Theorem 4.6]):
Theorem 7.14. Assume that the characteristic of k is not a torsion prime2 for
G. For each λ ∈X∨
+ there exists up to isomorphism a unique indecomposable
parity complex E(λ) such that supp(E(λ)) = Grλa and E(λ)|Grλ
a = kGrλ
a [dim Grλ
a].
Every indecomposable parity complex is isomorphic to E(λ) for some λ ∈X∨
+.
Denote by PG(O)(Gra(C), k) the G(O)-equivariant perverse sheaves on Gra(C)
with coeﬃcients in k. It comes equipped with a monoidal structure induced by
the convolution product ∗.
The Geometric Satake equivalence (see [MV07]) gives a monoidal equivalence
(PG(O)(Gra(C), k), ∗)
∼
=
−→(Rep(G∨), ⊗).
In [JMW14a] Juteau, Mautner and Williamson show that if the characteristic p
of k is larger than an explicit bound depending on the root system Φ of G, then
the indecomposable k-parity sheaves on the aﬃne Grassmannian are perverse.
More precisely, they show that for λ ∈X∨
+ the indecomposable tilting module
T(λ) is mapped to E(λ) under the geometric Satake equivalence for p > b(Φ)
(see below for the deﬁnition of b(Φ)).
2See [JMW14b, §2.6] for the deﬁnition of torsion primes. This restriction can be removed
by working in the non-equivariant setting.


PDF PAGE 86
80
7
MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS AND P-CELLS
Recall that G∨is assumed to be simply-connected. The extended aﬃne Weyl
group can be written as
W ext = W ⋊Ω
where Ωis a ﬁnite subgroup of “length zero elements” which acts by automor-
phisms of the Coxeter system (W, S) (see Section 6.1 for more details). The
action of W ext on X∨gives bijections:
X∨
∼
←→
W ext/Wf,
w(0)
←→
w,
X∨
+
∼
←→Wf\W ext/Wf =
[
σ∈Ω
Wf\W/σ(Wf).
Given λ ∈X∨
+ we denote by wλ ∈W the maximal element in the double coset
in S
σ∈ΩWf\W/σ(Wf) that corresponds to λ under the bijection above.
We call an element in W spherical if it is maximal in a double coset in
σ1(Wf)\W/σ2(Wf) for some σ1, σ2 ∈Ω. Note that the spherical elements are
precisely the elements in W of the form σ(wλ) for some λ ∈X∨
+ and σ ∈Ω. We
call a p-cell in W spherical if it contains a spherical element.
The Iwahori-Bruhat decomposition (see [Gör10, Theorem 2.18] or [Zhu16,
Remark 2.1.22]) of the complex points of the aﬃne ﬂag variety is of the form
Fla(C) =
[
x∈W ext
I(C)xI(C)/I(C).
In this case, each stratum I(C)xI(C)/I(C) for x ∈W ext is isomorphic to an
aﬃne space of dimension l(x). Note that I(C)-orbits give a reﬁnement of the
G(O)-orbits on Fla(C). It follows that the projection Fla(C) →Gra(C) is a
stratiﬁed ﬁbre bundle (in the sense of [JMW14b, Deﬁnition 2.32]) with ﬁbres
isomorphic to the ﬁnite ﬂag variety Fl(C). This implies the following result (see
also the next section for some more details):
Theorem 7.15. Suppose that all parity sheaves on the aﬃne Grassmannian
are perverse. Then pmwλ,wν ∈Z for all λ, ν ∈X∨
+.
The explicit bound has later been improved by Mautner and Riche in [MR15].
They show that the parity sheaves on the aﬃne Grassmannian are perverse
whenever the characteristic p of k is good for G, thus giving the following bounds
p > b(Φ) if the root system Φ of G is irreducible:
Type of Φ
An
Bn, Cn, Dn
E6, E7, F4, G2
E8
b(Φ)
1
2
3
5
The following result gives an interpretation of the multiplicities in the p-
canonical basis in terms of Rep(G∨) (see [JMW14a, Corollary 4.1] for the ﬁrst
part):
Lemma 7.16. Suppose that the characteristic p of k satisﬁes p > b(Φ). Then
we have for λ, µ ∈X∨
+:
(i) phwµ,wλ(1) = dim T(λ)µ,


PDF PAGE 87
7.5
The Geometric Satake and p-Cells
81
(ii) pmwµ,wλ = [T(λ) : ∆(µ)] = [T(λ) : ∇(µ)] where [T(λ) : ∆(µ)] denotes the
multiplicity of ∆(µ) in a ∆-ﬂag on T(λ).
The ﬁrst part of the last result shows that phwµ,wλ gives a q-analogue of
the weight multiplicity of µ in T(λ). In characteristic 0 (where T(λ) = L(λ))
this result can be found in [Lus83a, Theorem 6.1]. In particular, knowledge of
the characters of indecomposable tilting modules for G∨is equivalent to the
knowledge of the p-canonical basis elements {pHwλ | λ ∈X∨
+}.
7.5
The Geometric Satake and p-Cells
Now, in order to use the geometric Satake equivalence for the study of p-cells
we shift our perspective slightly. The ﬁrst step is to upgrade our setting to a
2-categorical level.
On the geometric side, we want to consider the 2-category Parity(G(K), k)
whose objects are subsets J of Sf. For each ﬁnitary subset J ⊂Sf we have
a parabolic subgroup B ⊂PJ ⊆G and a corresponding parahoric subgroup
ePJ which is the inverse image of PJ under the morphism L+G →G induced
by t 7→0. We deﬁne homomorphisms from J →K in Parity(G(K), k) to be
the full subcategory Paritye
PJ(C)×e
PK(C)(G(K), k) in Db
e
PJ(C)×e
PK(C)(G(K), k) of
equivariant parity sheaves on G(K) with coeﬃcients in k. For three ﬁnitary
subsets J, K, L ⊆Sf, one can deﬁne an associative convolution product
Db
e
PJ(C)×e
PK(C)(G(K), k) × Db
e
PK(C)×e
PL(C)(G(K), k) −→Db
e
PJ(C)×e
PL(C)(G(K), k)
denoted by ∗J as in [Lus97, §1.1] or [Nad05, §2.2 and §3.3]. Some care needs to
be taken as in the process sheaves with inﬁnite dimensional support may occur.
The convolution of two parity sheaves will again be a parity sheaf by [JMW14b,
Theorem 4.8].
Alternatively, one could use the category of diagrammatic singular Soergel
bimodules kSH as we will do in Section 10, but unfortunately a presentation of
this category by generators and relations is only available in rank 2 (see [Eli16;
Wil11]).
The category ParityI(C)×I(C)(G(K), k) gives by [RW16, Part 3] a cate-
goriﬁcation of the extended aﬃne Hecke algebra Hext.
Therefore, replacing
ParityI(C)×I(C)(G(K), k) by Parity(G(K), k) amounts on the level of Grothendieck
groups to replacing Hext by the extended aﬃne Hecke algebroid Hext.
We
want to relate it to the aﬃne Hecke algebroid.
Let us recall its deﬁnition
from [Wil11, §2.2] (where it is also called Hecke category; for the extended
aﬃne Hecke algebroid replace S by Sf and H by Hext in what follows). De-
note the longest element in ⟨J⟩by wJ. The aﬃne Hecke algebroid H = H(W,S)
is a Z[v, v−1]-linear category with ﬁnitary subsets J ⊆S as objects (as de-
ﬁned in Deﬁnition 4.8).
For ﬁnitary subsets J, K ⊆S the morphism space
HomH(J, K) is the Z[v, v−1]-module given by the intersection of the left ideal
HwJH with the right ideal HHwK in H.
The composition of morphisms
∗K : HomH(K, L)×HomH(J, K) →HomH(J, L) for ﬁnitary subsets J, K, L ⊆S
is deﬁned via renormalized multiplication:
y ∗K x = xy
πK


PDF PAGE 88
82
7
MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS AND P-CELLS
where πK = P
w∈WK vl(wK)−2l(w) is the Poincaré polynomial of K.
This is
well-deﬁned due to H2
wK = πKHwK (see [Wil11, (2.1.6)]). Observe that the
aﬃne Hecke algebra H occurs as the endomorphism space of  ⊂S in H.
Moreover, note that the deﬁnition of the Hecke algebroid is independent of the
characteristic p of k, as the longest element of any ﬁnite parabolic is smooth and
thus the Kazhdan-Lusztig and p-canonical basis element indexed by it coincide.
Example 7.17. The aﬃne Hecke algebroid in aﬃne type f
A2 can be described as
follows (see [Eli16, Proposition 2.20]):
{s, t}
{s, u}
{t, u}
{s}
{t}
{u}
∅
modulo the following relations for any pair {q, r} ∈{{s, t}, {s, u}, {t, u}}:
•
{q, r}
{q}
∅
=
{q, r}
{r}
∅
and
{q, r}
{q}
∅
=
{q, r}
{r}
∅
•
{r}
∅
= (v + v−1) Id{r} and
{q, r}
{r}
= (v2 + 1 + v−2) Id{q,t}
•
{q, r}
{r}
=
{r}
{q}
∅
−Id{r}
One also has to add the relations obtained by swapping the roles of q and r.
In order to relate the geometric Satake equivalence to the aﬃne Hecke alge-
broid, we follow the philosophy given in [Eli17, §6] and reformulate it using the
passage from Ω-graded-monoidal categories to Ω-2-categories (see [Eli17, §4.2]
for the deﬁnitions).
Recall that we have Ω∼= X∨/ZΦ∨as G∨is assumed to be simply-connected.
On the representation theoretic side, denote by Tilt(G∨)σ for σ ∈Ωthe category


PDF PAGE 89
7.5
The Geometric Satake and p-Cells
83
of all direct sums of indecomposable tilting modules T(λ) with λ ∈σ. The tensor
product then obeys multiplication in Ωas for σ1, σ2 ∈Ωand λi ∈σi we have
that T(λ1) ⊗T(λ2) lies in Tilt(G∨)σ1σ2. We view this Ω-graded-monoidal as a
k-linear Ω-2-category as follows: The objects are given by Ωand the morphism
category from σ to σς coincides with Tilt(G∨)ς for σ, ς ∈Ω. Denote this 2-
category by Tilt(G∨)Ω.
On the geometric side, consider the full 2-category Paritymsph(G(K), k) of
Parity(G(K), k) on subsets σ(Sf) for σ ∈Ωwhere msph stands for maximally
spherical. Recall that π0(LG(C)) = π1(G(C)) coincides with Ωas G is assumed
to be adjoint. Any indecomposable parity sheaf is supported on a single compo-
nent. Moreover, indecomposable parity sheaves on diﬀerent components admit
neither morphisms nor extensions. Convolution of parity sheaves corresponds
on the level of component support to multiplication in Ω. For this reason,
ParityG(O)×G(O)(G(K), k) ∼= ParityG(O)(Gra(C), k)
is a Ω-graded-monoidal category.
When viewed as a Ω-2-category it gives
Paritymsph(G(K), k).
(The last equivalence is a special case of the quotient
equivalence for equivariant derived categories from [BL94, §2.6.2]).
Now the following reformulation of the Geometric Satake equivalence shows
that it governs in the aﬃne Hecke algebroid the morphisms I →J for ﬁnitary
subsets I, J ⊆S such that ⟨I⟩∼= Wf ∼= ⟨J⟩:
Corollary 7.18. There is an equivalence of k-linear Ω-2-categories
Paritymsph(G(K), k) −→Tilt(G∨)Ω
mapping σ(Sf) to σ ∈Ωand for λ ∈σ the indecomposable parity sheaf E(λ) to
the indecomposable tilting module T(λ) on the level of homomorphisms.
Finally, we want to relate the convolution of G(O)-equivariant parity sheaves
on Gra(C) to the convolution of I(C)-equivariant parity sheaves on Fla(C).
The projection π : Fla(C) −→Gra(C) is a smooth ﬁbration with ﬁbre Fl(C).
Consider the following functor:
ParityG(O)(Gra(C), k)
π∗
−→ParityG(O)(Fla(C), k)
Res
−→ParityI(C)(Fla(C), k)
where Res is the functor that restricts equivariance from G(O) to the closed
subgroup I(C) (see [BL94, §2.6.1]). The whole composition preserves indecom-
posable parity sheaves (up to shift). This is the reason for Theorem 7.15. For
π∗one argues as in [WB12, Proposition 3.5]. Using equivariant formality (see
[MR15, Lemma 2.2 (2)]) we see that an equivariant parity sheaf is indecompos-
able if and only if it is indecomposable after forgetting equivariance (see [MR15,
Lemma 2.4] for the non-trivial direction). This implies that Res also preserves
indecomposable parity sheaves.
On the decategoriﬁed level, this corresponds to:
EndHext(Sf, Sf)
/ HomHext(Sf, )
/ EndHext()
HextHw0 ∩Hw0Hext 
/ Hw0Hext 
/ Hext


PDF PAGE 90
84
7
MODULAR WEIGHT CELLS AND P-CELLS
Lemma 7.19. For λ, µ ∈X∨
+ we have:
λ
p
⩽
T µ ⇒wλ
p
⩽
R wµ
Proof. For λ
p
⩽
T µ we have a tilting module T for G∨such that T(λ) is a direct
summand in T(µ) ⊗T. Under the geometric Satake equivalence, this translates
into the existence of a G(O)-equivariant parity sheaf E such that E(λ) is a
direct summand in E(µ) ∗E. Now, the statement follows as the convolution of
G(O)-equivariant parity sheaves on Gra(C) determines the convolution of their
pullbacks under π on Fla(C). On the decategoriﬁed level, this reduces to the
following calculation for hHw0, Hw0eh ∈HextHw0 ∩Hw0Hext:
incl(hHw0) ∗ incl(Hw0eh) = πSf incl(hHw0eh) = πSf incl(hHw0 ∗Sf Hw0eh)
In particular, for every summand E(λ) of the convolution E(µ) ∗E on Gra, its
pullback π∗E(λ) occurs as well as summand in the convolution π∗E(µ) ∗π∗E on
Fla(C) (even with bigger multiplicity!).
7.6
Perversity of the p-Canonical Basis in Spherical Cells
As was shown in [JMW14b] and [MR15], the parity sheaves on the aﬃne Grass-
mannian Gra are perverse for p good for G.
Thus the p-canonical basis for
spherical elements is perverse in these cases.
Lemma 7.20. Let x ∈W be spherical. Choose s, t ∈S such that xs > x and
tx > x. Then for y ∈{xs, tx, txs} the p-canonical basis element pHy is perverse
as well.
Proof. This follows immediately from Proposition 3.10(iii) and (v) and the mul-
tiplication formula in the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis using the fact that there is no
element having all elements of S in its left or right descent set.
In type eA2 the last lemma gives us:
Corollary 7.21. In type eA2, the p-canonical basis elements indexed by an ele-
ment in the lowest Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell are perverse.


PDF PAGE 91
85
8
Open Problems in Modular Representation
Theory
The following open questions in modular representation theory have spawned
many interesting theories in mathematics. The ﬁve questions we will be con-
cerned with are the following: Determine for n ⩾m ∈N ﬁxed . . .
(i) . . . the characters of the irreducible modules for the symmetric group Sm
in non-semi-simple characteristic p ⩽m.
(ii) . . . the dimensions of irreducible Sm-modules for the symmetric group Sm
in non-semi-simple characteristic p ⩽m.
(iii) . . . the characters of irreducible modules for the ﬁnite group of Lie type
SLn(Fpr) for all r, n ∈N in deﬁning characteristic p.
(iv) . . . the characters of irreducible modules for the algebraic group GLn or
SLn for all n ∈N in characteristic p.
(v) . . . the characters of tilting modules for the algebraic group GLn or SLn
for all n ∈N in characteristic p.
Most representation theorists have already thought about one of these ques-
tions or their characteristic 0-analogues. In this section, we want to explain
how the p-canonical basis of the aﬃne Hecke algebra H in type eAn+1 gives an
answer to all of these questions via the connections explained in Section 7.
Before we mention some implications among these problems, let us assume
G∨∈{GLn, SLn} with the standard choice of Borel subgroup and maximal
torus to ﬁx our input:
G∨⊇B∨:=







∗
. . .
. . .
∗
0
...
∗
...
...
...
...
...
0
. . .
0
∗







⊇T ∨:=







∗
0
. . .
0
0
...
...
...
...
...
...
0
0
. . .
0
∗







It should be noted that we only restrict to type eAn+1 because this is the best
documented case. All the arguments given below should carry over to other
types as well.
(v) ⇒(iv) The Steinberg tensor product theorem reduces the task of determining the
characters of all irreducible modules for SLn to those with p-restricted
highest weight. Thus by Proposition 6.13, the characters of the indecom-
posable tilting modules with highest weight in 2(p −1)ρ + w0X∨
p give for
p > 2h −2 all irreducible characters.
(iv) ⇒(iii) The Steinberg restriction theorem (see [Ste63]) shows that when restrict-
ing the irreducible SLn-modules with pr-restricted highest weights to
SLn(Fpr) one obtains a complete set of representatives of the isomor-
phism classes of simple SLn(Fpr)-modules in deﬁning characteristic (i.e.
in characteristic p = char k).


PDF PAGE 92
86
8
OPEN PROBLEMS IN MODULAR REPRESENTATION THEORY
(v) ⇒(ii) Let V be the natural representation for GLn.
Observe that V is for
p ⩾h the indecomposable tilting module with highest weight given by a
fundamental coweight. Therefore for all m ∈N the tensor power V ⊗m
can be decomposed into indecomposable tilting modules.
By modular
Schur-Weyl duality (see [KSX01]) we have for n = dim V ⩾m:
kSm ∼= EndGLn(V ⊗m)
Write V ⊗m = L
λ∈X+ T(λ)⊕dm
λ . From the isomorphism above, it follows
that kSm/ rad(kSm) is a product of matrix rings
Y
λ∈X+
dm
λ ̸=0
Mdm
λ (k).
Therefore T(λ) corresponds to an irreducible Sm-module of dimension
dm
λ . A more detailed analysis shows that dm
λ gives the dimension of the
irreducible Sm-module indexed by λ for λ p-regular and vanishes otherwise
(see [Erd94, Proposition 4.2]).
(v) ⇒(i) The multiplicities of Weyl modules in tilting modules for GLn give the
decomposition numbers of the symmetric group Sm for n ⩾m (see [Erd94,
Lemma 4.5]).
In order to give some more details, we need to recall some facts about
the Schur algebra Sk(n, m) and quasi-hereditary algebras in general. The
Schur algebra Sk(n, m) is isomorphic to EndkSm(V ⊗m) and the category
of Sk(n, m)-modules is equivalent to the category of polynomial repre-
sentations of GLn that are homogeneous of degree m (see [Gre07, §2.4]).
Denote by Λ+(n, m) the set of all partitions of m with at most n parts
(which is the set of all partitions of m as soon as n ⩾m). Parshall shows in
[Par89, Theorem 4.1] that Sk(n, m) is a quasi-hereditary algebra with sim-
ple, standard, costandard modules denoted by LS(λ), ∆S(λ) and ∇S(λ)
respectively for λ ∈Λ+(n, m) where Λ+(n, m) is equipped with the usual
dominance order.
We set
T := V ⊗m ⊕
M
λ∈Λ+(n,m)
not p-regular
T(λ).
From [Erd94, Proposition 4.2] it follows that every indecomposable tilt-
ing module occurs at least once in T. Thus, S′ := EndS(T) is Morita-
equivalent to the Ringel dual of S (as introduced in [Rin92, §6]) due to
the strong Ext-vanishing that tilting modules satisfy. (This Ext-vanishing
is a consequence of Proposition 6.5.) Denote by IS(λ) the injective hull of
LS(λ) for λ ∈Λ+(n, m) and by FS(∆) (resp. FS(∇)) the full subcategory
of S-modules with a ∆- (resp. ∇-)ﬁltration. Ringel shows in [Rin92, Theo-
rem 6] that the Ringel dual of S and thus S′ is again quasi-hereditary with
standard modules ∆S′(λ) = HomS(T, ∇S(λ)) for λ ∈Λ+(n, m) where the
partial order on Λ+(n, m) is reversed. Moreover, the functor HomS(T, −)
from S-modules to S′-modules induces an equivalence FS(∇)
∼
−→FS′(∆)
mapping IS(λ) to TS′(λ).


PDF PAGE 93
87
Therefore, we get the following equalities for λ, µ ∈Λ+(n, m) with λ p-
regular:
[T(λ) : ∆(µ)] = [TS(λ) : ∆S(µ)]
= [IS′(λ) : ∇S′(µ)]
= [∆S′(µ) : LS′(λ)]
where the second equality comes from the equivalence FS′(∇)
∼
−→FS(∆)
after identifying S with its double Ringel dual S′′ and the last one from
“BGG-reciprocity” (see [CPS88, Theorem 3.11]).
Finally, Erdmann considers the idempotent e ∈S corresponding to the
direct summand V ⊗m
⊕
⊆T and observes that the canonical morphism
ρ : kSm →EndS(V ⊗m) induces an isomorphism kSm/ ker(ρ)
∼
−→eS′e =
EndS(V ⊗m) which identiﬁes for γ ∈Λ+(n, m) the Specht module Sγ
with e∆S′(γ) and for γ p-regular the simple module Dγ with eLS′(γ) (see
[Erd94, Proposition 4.3]). As λ is assumed to be p-regular, we have that
eLS′(λ) is non-zero. In particular, [−: LS′(λ)] equals [e(−) : eLS′(λ)]
because the functor HomS′(Ae, −) is exact and kills precisely those sim-
ple S′-modules LS′(γ) whose projective covers do not occur as a direct
summand of Ae. Thus, we can conclude:
[∆S′(µ) : LS′(λ)] = [e∆S′(µ) : eLS′(λ)]
= [Sµ : Dλ] = dµ,λ


PDF PAGE 94
88
9
TYPE ˜A1
9
Type ˜A1
To ﬁx the based root datum as input, we follow the conventions of Section 3.4
and work in the aﬃne setting. We label the simple reﬂections in S as follows:
∞
s
t
That means that the pairing of simple roots and coroots is given as follows:
⟨α∨
s , αt⟩= −2,
⟨α∨
t , αs⟩= −2.
9.1
The p-Canonical Basis in eA1
As we discussed in Section 7.4, knowledge of the characters of the tilting modules
for SL2 in characteristic p gives us part of the p-canonical basis for the Weyl
group of type eA1. Actually in this case two miracles occur:
(i) Donkin’s tilting tensor product theorem ([Don93, Proposition 2.1]) to-
gether with the knowledge of the characters of the fundamental tilting
modules (e.g. see [DH05, Lemma 1.1]) allow us to determine the charac-
ters of all indecomposable tilting modules. (This is the only semi-simple
group for which all tilting characters are known).
(ii) The set {wλ | λ ∈X∨
+} together with its image under the automorphism
s ↔t yields the set W \ {Id}.
In particular, knowledge of the tilting
characters gives the whole p-canonical basis for SL2.
To bypass the calculations, the following result (see [EH02, Lemma 6]) is
useful because it gives a combinatorial description of the ∇-multiplicities of an
indecomposable tilting module.
Lemma 9.1. Let n ∈Z⩾0. Write n uniquely as Pl
i=0 nipi with p −1 ⩽ni ⩽
2p −2 for i < l and 0 ⩽nl ⩽p −1.
Then ∇(m) occurs in a ∇-ﬂag of T(n) if and only if m = Pl
i=0 mipi where
mj = nj or mj = 2p −2 −nj for j < l and ml = nl. Moreover, the multiplicity
[T(n) : ∇(m)] is at most one.
Observe that in the last lemma for m = Pl
i=0 mipi the coeﬃcients are not
required to satisfy p −1 ⩽mi ⩽2p −2 for i < m. For n = Pl
i=0 nipi as in
the lemma there are precisely 2r natural numbers m such that ∇(m) occurs in
a ∇-ﬂag of T(n) where r = |{0 ⩽i < l | ni ̸= p −1}|.
To give an example how this works, consider n = 15 and p = 3. This is
uniquely written as 15 = 3 · 30 + 4 · 3 + 0 · 32 (as described in the last lemma;
the last 0 matters!) and thus 4 standard modules occur (with multiplicity one)
in a ∇-ﬂag of T(15), namely ∇(m) for m among the following:
1 = 1 · 30 + 0 · 31 + 0 · 32,
3 = 3 · 30 + 0 · 31 + 0 · 32,
13 = 1 · 30 + 4 · 31 + 0 · 32,
15 = 3 · 30 + 4 · 31 + 0 · 32.


PDF PAGE 95
9.1
The p-Canonical Basis in eA1
89
See Figure 1 for the multiplicities of ∇(m) in T(n) for p = 3 where each black
box represents a one. Using Lemma 7.16 we get for example:
3Hs
= Hs
3Hst
=
Hst
3Hsts
=
Hsts
3Hstst
=
Hst + Hstst
3Hststs
= Hs
+
Hststs
3Hststst
=
Hststst
3Hstststs =
Hststs
+
Hstststs
3Hstststst =
Hstst
+
Hstststst
0
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
10
10
11
11
12
12
13
13
14
14
15
15
16
16
17
17
18
18
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
26
26
27
27
28
28
29
29
30
30
31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34
35
35
36
36
37
37
38
38
39
39
40
40
n
m
Figure 1: The multiplicities of ∇(m) in T(n) for p = 3.


PDF PAGE 96
90
9
TYPE ˜A1
Note that even in this relatively simple example one sees a beautiful fractal-
like structure emerging!
9.2
Cell Structure in eA1
For the inﬁnite dihedral group (W, {s, t}) the Kazhdan-Lusztig cells look as
follows:
Lemma 9.2.
(i) The decomposition of W into Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells is
given by W = {e}∪sC ∪tC where rC := {w ∈W | rw < w} for r ∈{s, t}.
(ii) There are precisely two Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cells:
W = {e} ∪(W \ {e})
Proof. Observe that any element of W admits a unique reduced expression.
Therefore the statements follow from [Lus83b, Proposition 3.8 (b) and (c)].
Recall the deﬁnition of strings in Deﬁnition 5.1 and observe that rC for
r ∈{s, t} is a right string with respect to {s, t}. Let sbl denote the alternating
word in s and t starting in s of length l. The following result describes explicitly
the p-cells in this case:
Proposition 9.3. For r ∈{s, t} the decomposition of rC into right p-cells is
given by
rC =
[
l∈Z⩾0
rCl
where rCl = {rbi | pl ⩽i < pl+1} contains (p −1)pl elements.
The lowest
Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell decomposes into two-sided p-cells as follows:
W \ {e} =
[
l∈N
Cl
where Cl = sCl ∪tCl contains 2(p −1)pl elements.
Proof. Recall that the set {wλ | λ ∈X∨
+} together with its image under the
automorphism s ↔t yields the set W \ {Id}. Therefore, the right p-cells are
completely determined by Corollary 4.5 and the modular weight cells via the
geometric Satake equivalence.
Moreover, Proposition 6.36 gives all modular
weight cells for SL2. Finally, observe that each piece rCl corresponds under
Geometric Satake to the modular weight cell cl
1. The modular weight cell cl
1
contains precisely (p −1)pl elements and can be described as
{n ∈N | pl −1 ⩽n < pl+1 −1} ⊂X+
under the usual identiﬁcations X = Z = X∨, Φ = ∆= {2} and Φ∨= ∆∨= {1}
for SL2. The two-sided p-cells can be easily deduced from this using Lemma 4.6.
Remark 9.4. Note that one can also work out the modular weight cells by hand
using the explicit knowledge of the characters of tilting modules for SL2 (see
Lemma 9.1) without appealing to Proposition 6.36. For this, one should observe
that when tensoring T(pr+1−2) for r ⩾1 with the standard representation V =


PDF PAGE 97
9.2
Cell Structure in eA1
91
T(1) gives a direct sum of indecomposable tilting modules in which T(pr −1)
occurs and all other summands have highest weight > pr −1. One can check:
T(l) ⊗V ∼=
(
T(l + 1)
if l = 0 or l = rp −1 for some r ⩾1,
T(l + 1) ⊕T(l −1)⊕m
if l ̸∈{0, rp −1, (r + 2)p −2 | r ⩾1}.
In the second case the multiplicity m is either 1 or 2. Lastly, ﬁx r and consider
pr −1 ⩽lp−2 < pr+1−1 for some l ⩾1. If T(m) is a summand of T(lp−2)⊗V ,
then we have m ⩾pr −1.
Remark 9.5. The last proposition gives the ﬁrst example of an aﬃne Weyl group
with inﬁnitely many right p-cells. Recall that in general aﬃne Weyl groups have
ﬁnitely many Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells (see [Lus87, Theorem 2.2]).
Lemma 9.6. Assume p > 2. For λ ∈cr
1 we have
pr| dim T(λ)
and
pr+1 ̸ | dim T(λ).
Proof. First observe that for i ∈Cp the prime p does not divide dim T(i) =
dim ∇(i) = i + 1 < p. By Lemma 6.17 we have dim T(p −1) = p. Combining
the knowledge of the irreducible characters (see for example [Bon11, Theorem
10.1.8]) together with Proposition 6.13, we obtain
ch T(p −1 + i) = ch ∇(p −1 + i) + ch ∇(p −1 −i)
for all 1 ⩽i ⩽p −1. Thus we have dim T(p −1 + i) = 2p for i in the same
range.
For λ ∈Z⩾0 write λ = Pm
i=0 λipi where p −1 ⩽λi ⩽2p −2 for 0 ⩽i ⩽m
and 0 ⩽λm ⩽p−1. Observe that in our expression for λ the upper bound m of
the summation may not be uniquely deﬁned because the sequence of coeﬃcients
(∗, . . . , ∗, p −1) of length l may also be viewed as (∗, . . . , ∗, p −1, 0) of length
l + 1. The ambiguity in our expression for λ may be eliminated by assuming
m to be minimal. Then the above considerations show that the highest power
of p dividing dim T(λ) is given by m + δλm,p−1 where δλm,p−1 is the Kronecker
delta.
Finally, check that the natural numbers λ for which the highest power of p
dividing dim T(λ) is r are given by
{n ∈N | pr −1 ⩽n ⩽pr+1 −2}.
As this coincides with our description of cr
1 given above, the claim is proved.
Remark 9.7. We assume p > 2 in the last lemma for the following reason: In
the proof we have seen that dim T(p −1 + i) = 2p for 1 ⩽i ⩽p −1. Thus for
p = 2 the p-valuation of the dimension of the indecomposable tilting modules
in a modular weight cell is not constant.
From this the following questions arise:
• Can we establish similar connections between modular weight cells and
dimensions of indecomposable tilting modules in positive characteristic in
other cases?


PDF PAGE 98
92
9
TYPE ˜A1
• Can the J-ring be deﬁned in the same way as in the classical case? How
do the structure coeﬃcients diﬀer?
Recently, Lusztig and Williamson
proposed a conjecture about certain tilting characters in SL3. One of its
consequences is that the standard deﬁnition of Lusztig’s a-function for the
p-canonical basis is unbounded (see [LW17b, Remark 5.2(8)]).


PDF PAGE 99
93
10
Cell Structure in Aﬃne Rank 2
Throughout the section, we use the conventions of Section 3.4 to ﬁx the based
root datum as input and work in the aﬃne setting. The aﬃne Dynkin diagrams
of rank 2 look as follows:
Type eA2 :
s
t
u
Type eC2 :
u
s
t
Type eG2 :
s
t
u
We assume that u is the aﬃne reﬂection added, thus S0 = {s, t} generates the
Weyl group of G. In other words, in the based root datum we used as input the
basis ∆equals {αs, αt}.
Next, we want to describe the Coxeter automorphisms of (W, S) given by
the elements in Ωmore explicitly in aﬃne rank 2. For a special point v ∈A0
denote the corresponding automorphism of (W, S) by ϕv.
• In type eA2 the automorphism ϕω∨
t (resp. ϕω∨
s ) acts by a clockwise (resp.
counterclockwise) rotation of the Dynkin diagram.
• In type eC2 the automorphism ϕω∨
t acts by swapping t and u.
• In type eG2 the group Ωis trivial.
10.1
Kazhdan-Lusztig Cells Decompose into p-Cells
In this section, we will apply the results of Section 4.2 to the aﬃne Weyl groups
of rank 2.
The necessary assumptions are satisﬁed for any right cell in the
following cases where we have already used the action of Ωto reduce the number
of right-minimal elements to check:
Type
Dynkin diagram
Bound on p
Right-minimal elements to check
eA2
s
t
u
none
Id, u, sts, usts
eC2
u
s
t
p ⩾3
Id, s, t, tu, tstu, stu, tsusu,
tstusts, stst, stsusu
eG2
s
t
u
p ⩾5
Id,
s,
t,
u,
su,
tsu,
tstsu,
stsu,
ststsu,
utstsu,
tut,
stut,
ststut,
tstut,
tststut,
utststut,
ststst,
uststst,
tuststst,
stuststst,
tstuststst,
utstuststst,
ststuststst,
uststuststst,
tuststuststst,
stuststuststst,
tstuststuststst,
utstuststuststst


PDF PAGE 100
94
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
In fact, in types eA2 and eC2 the necessary intersection forms can be calculated
by hand. For eG2 the result is based on computer calculation. From this, we
immediately deduce:
Corollary 10.1. Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells decompose into right p-cells in
aﬃne rank 2 for p larger than the bounds given above.
In type eC2 the 2-canonical basis diﬀers from the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis only
for the following right-minimal elements:
2Htstu
= Htstu + Htu
2Htstusts = Htstusts + Htusts
In type eG2 the p-canonical basis for p ∈{2, 3} diﬀers from the Kazhdan-
Lusztig basis only for the following right-minimal elements:
2Htstsu
= Htstsu + Htsu
2Hststsu
= Hststsu + Hsu
2Hutstsu
= Hutstsu + Htuts + Hsu
2Hststut
= Hststut + Hstut
2Htststut
= Htststut + Htut
2Hutststut
= Hutststut + (v + v−1)Htut
2Htstuststst
= Htstuststst + Htuststst
2Hutstuststst
= Hutstuststst + (v + v−1)Htuststst
2Hststuststst
= Hststuststst + Huststst
2Huststuststst
= Huststuststst + (v + v−1)Huststst
2Htuststuststst
= Htuststuststst + (v + v−1)Hststst
2Hstuststuststst
= Hstuststuststst + Huststuststst + (v2 + 1 + v−1)Hststst
2Htstuststuststst = Htstuststuststst + Hutstuststst + (v3 + v−3)Hststst
2Hutstuststuststst = Hutstuststuststst + (v + v−1)Hutstuststst+
Htuststst + (v3 + v−3)Huststst
3Htstut
= Htstut + Htut
3Htststut
= Htststut + Htstut
3Hutststut
= Hutststut + Htutstu + Hstut
3Htuststuststst
= Htuststuststst + Hutstuststst
3Htstuststuststst = Htstuststuststst + Htuststuststst
3Hutstuststuststst = Hutstuststuststst + Htutststuststst + Huststuststst


PDF PAGE 101
10.2
General Scheme
95
For any right-minimal element x, consider the diﬀerence pHx −Hx. Observe
that it is always a sum of Kazhdan-Lusztig basis elements indexed by elements in
a diﬀerent Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell, but the same or a lower Kazhdan-Lusztig
two-sided cell. Therefore, we may apply our criterion to Kazhdan-Lusztig two-
sided cells to see that Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cells in aﬃne rank 2 decompose
into two-sided p-cells for all primes p.
Corollary 10.2. Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cells decompose into two-sided p-
cells in aﬃne rank 2 for all primes p.
Since all elements in one right cell have the same left descent set, we know
that
{w ∈W | L(w) = S \ Sf} = fW \ {Id}
decomposes into right p-cells. Combining this with the last result we get:
Corollary 10.3. Anti-spherical Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells decompose into right
p-cells in aﬃne rank 2 for all primes p.
10.2
General Scheme
In this section, we will explain the general idea how to determine the p-cells in
eA2 and eC2 for p > 2h −2. We will therefore assume p > 2h −2 throughout
the whole section without further mention. In Section 10.1 we showed that the
Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells decompose in right p-cells under our assumptions
on p.
The ﬁrst step is to use Proposition 5.17 and Proposition 4.7 to reduce the
question of the decomposition behaviour to spherical, anti-spherical and unique
reduced expression right Kazhdan-Lusztig cells.
Next, observe that the connection between anti-spherical right p-cells and
modular weight cells for p > h together with the fractal-like behaviour of
the modular weight cells (see Lemma 6.35) shows that the decomposition be-
haviour of the anti-spherical Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell contained in the lowest
Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell is completely determined by the decomposition
behaviour of the the higher anti-spherical Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells.
Then we will determine very explicitly the decomposition behaviour of the re-
maining Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells. From this, we deduce the modular weight
cells using Theorem 7.8.
The last step is to show that via Geometric Satake the spherical right p-cells
are determined by modular weight cells. For this, it will suﬃce to show the
following:
• All elements in a box that contains a spherical element belong to the
same right p-cell. (Observe that any spherical Kazhdan-Lusztig cell in
aﬃne rank 2 decomposes into boxes and each box contains a spherical
element).
• There are no more right p-cell relations between the spherical elements
than the ones coming from geometric Satake.


PDF PAGE 102
96
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
10.3
eA2
According to the extended Dynkin diagram of type eA2, the pairing of simple
roots and coroots is given as follows:
⟨α∨
r , αr′⟩= −1 for r ̸= r′ ∈S.
10.3.1
Reduction step
Figure 2 shows the Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in type eA2 (see [Lus85, Theorem 11.3
and Proposition 11.6]). All alcoves of the same colour belong to one Kazhdan-
Lusztig two-sided cell. Each right-connected component among the alcoves of
the same colour gives a Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell. The dot marks the origin
as chosen special point.
Figure 2: Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in type eA2
uC
s,tA
s,t eA
Using the action of the elements in Ω∼= Z/3Z and Proposition 4.7 we can
reduce the question of the decomposition behaviour to the following Kazhdan-
Lusztig right cells:
Ctriv = {e}
uC = {w ∈W | w has a unique rex with u ∈L(w)}
s,tA = {w ∈W | L(w) = {s, t}}
s,t eA = u(s,tA)
Among these, Ctriv,
uC and s,t eA are anti-spherical and s,tA is a spherical
Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell. In this case, we can even reduce one step further by


PDF PAGE 103
10.3
eA2
97
observing that s,tA is obtained from s,t eA by applying the left star-operation with
respect to {s, u} (or {t, u}) (see Proposition 5.17). Note that s,tA belongs to
the lowest Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell and thus we only need to determine
how uC decomposes into right p-cells.
10.3.2
Unique reduced expression cells
In this section we determine how uC decomposes into p-cells. The following
result combined with Corollary 10.1 shows that uC itself is a p-cell.
Lemma 10.4. Let w ∈uC. Suppose R(w) = {t} and ws > w for s ∈S such
that ws /∈uC. Consider (−)∗the star-operation deﬁned with respect to {s, t}.
Then kBw∗is a summand in kBwkBs.
Proof. Because w lies in uC, the element w has a unique reduced expression w.
First check that kBw∗is a summand in the Bott-Samelson corresponding to
ws. Write w = vst with l(w) = l(v) + 2. Then kBw∗= kBvs is a summand in
kBvkBs which in turn is a summand in the Bott-Samelson corresponding to ws
(because kBv
⊕
⊆BS(v) and kBs
⊕
⊆BS(sts)).
In order to see that kBw∗is a summand of kBwkBs we claim that it is
enough to check that kBv does not occur in the Bott-Samelson for w. Indeed,
the Bott-Samelson corresponding to w contains indecomposable summands for
which the length of the indexing element has the same parity as l(w) and among
these the only one that may contribute kBvs when tensoring with kBs are kBv
and kBw.
Our claim holds because there is a unique subexpression of w expressing v
(just leave out the last two letters) and it is of defect 2 as u also lies on the
wall.
Alternatively, we could have used a similar argument as for type eC2.
10.3.3
Modular weight cells for SL3
In this section we will use the connection between p-cells in W = Wf ⋉ZΦ∨
and modular weight cells and their fractal-like behaviour to deduce the mod-
ular weight cells for SL3. The following result follows immediately from Sec-
tion 10.3.2 and Theorem 7.8:
Proposition 10.5. The set c0
2 := X∨
+ \ (Y1 ∪Cp) is a modular weight cell.
The fractal-like behaviour of modular weight cells (see Lemma 6.35) implies
for p ⩾2h −2 the following result, which is mentioned in [And04, Example 15]
without proof:
Corollary 10.6. For all r ∈N the set cr
2 := Yr \(Yr+1 ∪cr
1) is a modular weight
cell.
Therefore the modular weight cells in X∨
+ are given by
{cr
i | r ∈N, 1 ⩽i ⩽2}
and they form a descending chain with respect to the preorder
p
⩽
T as follows:
c1
1
p>
T c1
2
p>
T c2
1
p>
T c2
2
p>
T . . .
p>
T ci
1
p>
T ci
2
p>
T . . .


PDF PAGE 104
98
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
Thus for every modular tensor ideal in Tilt(SL3) there exist i ∈{1, 2} and
r ∈N such that the modular tensor ideal is the full subcategory of Tilt(SL3)
consisting of direct sums of indecomposable tilting modules T(λ) for λ
p
⩽
T cr
i .
10.3.4
Spherical cells
Figure 3 shows a box containing elements in s,tA. Observe that any marked
point is special. For any marked point v, its stabilizer Wv is a ﬁnite parabolic
subgroup generated by a pair of simple reﬂections Sv.
All alcoves having v
in its closure lie in a right Wv-coset. In this coset, the alcoves that intersect
non-trivially the arrow of the same colour as the marked point lie in a right
Wv-string. Due to the position of such a box relative to the fundamental alcove,
the corresponding right strings will always look as indicated by the little arrows
no matter which box we consider. Therefore, Lemma 5.10 applied to any one
of the two marked right strings implies in this setting:
Lemma 10.7. If a box contains a spherical element, then all elements in the
box lie in the same right p-cell of W.
Figure 3: Box in s,tA in type aﬃne eA2
Remark 10.8. Actually, one can understand the situation in this case quite ex-
plicitly: For any one of the two marked special points, consider the translation
along the string and then to the longest element in the right coset. This can
be related under the geometric Satake equivalence to the functor given by ten-
soring with T(ω∨) ⊕triv for some fundamental coweight ω∨and the trivial
representation triv.
In this section, we will often identify an object c ∈C in a monoidal category
C with the endofunctor (−) ⊗c : C −→C. Singular diagrammatics will only
be necessary in the following proof (and in one more proof in type eC2). We
denote by kSH the 2-category of diagrammatic singular Soergel bimodules. Its
objects are ﬁnitary subsets of S. There is a generating 1-morphism between
two ﬁnitary subsets if an only if one is contained in the other and their sizes
diﬀer by one. The 2-morphisms are given by singular Soergel diagrams. The
precise deﬁnitions and more details can be found in [Eli17, §3.3] for type eA2
and [Eli16, §6.1.1] for rank 2. For ﬁnitary subsetes J, I2, I1 ⊂S with I2 ⊂I1
write indI2
I1 : HomkSH(J, I1) −→HomkSH(J, I2) for the induction functor on
the right hand side. Similarly for ﬁnitary subsets J2 ⊂J1 write J2
J1ind for the
induction functor on the left hand side. Set indI := ind
I , Jind := 
Jind and
J2
J1indI2
I1 := J2
J1ind ◦indI2
I1 = indI2
I1 ◦J2
J1ind.


PDF PAGE 105
10.3
eA2
99
For λ ∈X∨
+ consider wλ ∈W. For r ∈Sf denote by Pω∨
r (λ) the unique
sequence of two simple reﬂections needed to extend any reduced expression of
wλ to a reduced expression for wλ+ω∨
r . Note that Pω∨
r (λ) only depends on the
class of λ in Ω= X∨/ZΦ∨. Fix r ∈Sf and let Pω∨
r (λ) = (s1, s2).
The next result decomposes the identity on the functor
Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ : HomkSH(Sf, Sλ) −→HomkSH(Sf, )
as a sum of two idempotents one of which corresponds under geometric Satake
to the endofunctor T(ω∨
r ) on Tilt(G∨).
Proposition 10.9. The functor
Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ : HomkSH(Sf, Sλ) −→HomkSH(Sf, )
can be decomposed as a direct sum
Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ = indSλ ⊕indSλ+ω∨
r ◦Tω∨
r
where the functor Tω∨
r : HomkSH(Sf, Sλ) −→HomkSH(Sf, Sλ+ωr) corresponds
under the geometric Satake equivalence to the 1-morphism T(ω∨
r ) ∈Tilt(G∨)ω∨
r .
Proof. In the diagrams we will restrict to the case Sλ = {t, u}, r = t and thus
Pω∨
t (λ) = (s, t).
All other cases for r = t can be obtained by applying an
arbitrary element of Ωto all colours involved.
The idea is to ﬁrst induce from Sλ to Sλ ∩Sλ+ω∨
r and then to . This allows
us to use relation [Eli17, (3.16)] to rewrite the identity on Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ as
follows:
=
−
Observe that we need the non-quantum case of [Eli17] throughout and thus in
all equations q should be specialized to 1. [Eli17, Claim 3.14] shows that the
ﬁrst term on the right hand side is an idempotent. Similary, [Eli17, (3.13) and
(3.14a)] give us that the second term on the right hand side (together with the
minus sign) is an idempotent as ∂x(αy) = −1 for all pairs of simple reﬂections
x ̸= y ∈S. Next, we will show that these two idempotents are orthogonal to
each other. All equation numbers in the following calculation refer to [Eli17]:
(3.15a)
=
(3.14a)
=
0
where the last equality holds as ∂t(1) = 0.
Thus, we have decomposed the
functor Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ as a direct sum of two functors.


PDF PAGE 106
100
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
The ﬁrst idempotent on the right hand side factors through the identity on
indSλ+ω∨
r ◦Tω∨
r (see [Eli17, Theorem 3.21, Claim 3.7 and the paragraph preceding
it]), while the second idempotent factors through the identity on indSλ. (In
order to verify this, recall that Elias in [Eli17] reads 1-morphisms from right to
left.)
Remark 10.10. One should think of the decomposition given in Proposition 10.9
as a relation between diﬀerent paths in the aﬃne Hecke algebroid:
HomkSH(Sf, )
HomkSH(Sf, Sλ+ω∨
r \ Sλ)
HomkSH(Sf, Sλ ∩Sλ+ω∨
r )
HomkSH(Sf, Sλ+ω∨
r )
HomkSH(Sf, Sλ)
indSλ
Tω∨
r
indSλ+ω∨
r
Since in type eA2 both fundamental weights act non-trivially on S we have
the following result:
Corollary 10.11. The only indecomposable summand in kBwλ
kBs1
kBs2 in-
dexed by an element y ∈W with R(y) = Sλ is wλ, all other elements y indexing
indecomposable summands satisfy R(y) = Sλ+ω∨
r .
For any special point v ∈E and y ∈W with Avy ⊂Πv we deﬁne
Ev,y =
X
x⩽y
l(wvx)=l(wv)+l(x)
0hwvx,wvyHx
Observe that for s ∈S \ Sv we have Ev,s = Hs. The following lemma can be
found in [Xi90, Lemma 2.7] and is proved using the periodic Hecke module (as
introduced in [Lus80a], see also [Soe97b, §4]). For us it is the main reason of
interest for the elements Ev,y:
Lemma 10.12. Let x, y ∈W such that A0x = Av ⊆C0 and Avy ⊂Πv. Then
we have:
Hw0xEv,y = Hw0xy.
For us the most interesting case will be the situation when y is the unique
simple reﬂection in S \ Sλ = {s1}.
Corollary 10.13. The following holds: HwλHs1 = Hwλs1.
Lemma 10.14. We have: pHwλHs1 = pHwλs1.
Proof. When expressing the p-canonical basis element pHwλ in terms of the
Kazhdan-Lusztig basis, all Kazhdan-Lusztig basis elements with a non-zero co-
eﬃcient are indexed by spherical elements y ∈W with L(y) = Sf = L(wλ) and
R(y) = Sv = R(wλ). Thus Corollary 10.13 is applicable to all these terms and
we get:
pHwλHs1 =
X
y⩽wλ
pmy,wλHys1


PDF PAGE 107
10.3
eA2
101
We claim that this element is precisely pHwλs1. Indeed, the claim follows using
Corollary 5.7 as all occuring Kazhdan-Lusztig basis elements in pHwλHs1 are
indexed by an element in a right ⟨Sλ+ω∨
r ⟩-string.
Finally, we can show that we do not have any more right p-cell preorder rela-
tions between spherical elements than the ones coming from Geometric Satake.
In other words, the modular weight cells determine the p-cell decomposition of
the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell s,tA = {w ∈W | L(w) = Sf}.
Corollary 10.15. For λ, µ ∈X∨
+ we have:
µ
p
⩽
T λ ⇔wµ
p
⩽
R wλ
Proof. The direction ⇒was shown in Lemma 7.19. It remains to prove the
direction ⇐. Consider a sequence of elementary right p-cell relations:
wλ = x1
p→
R x2
p→
R x3
p→
R . . .
p→
R xm = wµ
where for 1 ⩽i < m the structure coeﬃcient pµxi+1
xi,si is non-zero. Without loss
of generality we may assume xisi > xi for all 1 ⩽i < m.
We claim that this right p-cell relation implies a modular weight cell relation
µ
p
⩽
T λ. For this we proceed by induction on m. The induction start and the
induction step follow from the same arguments: Lemma 10.14 imples that s1
is the unique simple reﬂection in S \ Sλ and thus x2 = x1s1. It follows that
the pair (s1, s2) coincides with Pω∨
r (λ) for some r ∈Sf. From Proposition 10.9
we deduce that x3 = wζ for some ζ ∈X∨
+ and that the sequence wλ = x1
p→
R
x2
p→
R x3 = wζ implies ζ
p
⩽
T
λ. More precisely, T(ζ) is a direct summand in
T(λ) ⊗(T(ω∨
r ) ⊕triv) where triv denotes the trivial G∨-module. Finally, we
may apply induction to the remaining sequence wζ = x3
p→
R . . .
p→
R xm = wµ to
ﬁnish the proof.
10.3.5
Right p-cell structure
In Figure 4 rotate the cone on the right and place it with its tip at each blue
point in such a way that each time it covers precisely one Kazhdan-Lusztig right
cell in the lowest Kazhdan-Lusztig two-sided cell. The resulting picture shows
the right p-cells in type f
A2 for p = 5. Note that we could of course only depict
a ﬁnite region in the cone which shows signs of the fractal-like behaviour of the
p-cells.
If follows from Lemma 4.6 that all the alcoves of the same colour in the
resulting picture are contained in a two-sided p-cell. Moreover, all Kazhdan-
Lusztig two-sided cells apart from the lowest one are two-sided p-cells.
Conjecture 10.16.
All alcoves of the same colour form a two-sided p-cell.


PDF PAGE 108
102
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
Figure 4: Right p-cells in type eA2
•
•
••
•
•
10.4
eC2
As mentioned in Proposition 6.4, the aﬃne Dynkin diagram is realized as the
Dynkin diagram of {−α0} ∪{α | α ∈∆} where α0 is the highest root. Taking
the Langlands dual amounts to swapping roots and coroots, giving the Dynkin
diagram of {−α∨
0 } ∪{α∨| α ∈∆}. In particular, the Langlands dual of the
aﬃne Dynkin diagram of type eC2 looks as follows:
u
s
t
That means that the pairing of simple roots and coroots is given as follows for
all r ∈{t, u}:
⟨α∨
r , αs⟩= −2,
⟨α∨
s , αr⟩= −1,
⟨α∨
t , αu⟩= ⟨α∨
u, αt⟩= 0.
We will use this as input for kH in this section.
Remark 10.17. We could have also used the pairing of the simple roots and
coroots prescribed by the aﬃne Dynkin diagram of type eC2 as input. In the
proof of [Ach+17b, Theorem 7.2] an explicit equivalence between the two cor-
responding diagrammatic categories is constructed for p > 2.


PDF PAGE 109
10.4
eC2
103
10.4.1
Reduction step
Figure 5 shows the Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in type eC2 with the same conventions
as for type eA2 (see Section 10.3.1).
Figure 5: Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in type eC2
uC
sC
B1
B2
B3
s,tA
A1
A2
A3
Using the action of the elements in Ω∼= Z/2Z and Proposition 4.7 we can
reduce the question of the decomposition behaviour to the labelled Kazhdan-
Lusztig right cells in Figure 5. Next, observe that B1 and A1 are contained
in DR(s, u). We have eB1 = B2 ∪B3 and eA1 = A2 ∪A3 in the notation of
Proposition 5.17. Using descent set considerations as explained in Remark 5.18,
this allows us to reduce the question of the decomposition behaviour of these six
right Kazhdan-Lusztig cells to B1 and A1. Therefore, it is enough to determine
how the following Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells decompose into right p-cells:
Ctriv = {e}
uC = {w ∈W | w has a unique rex with u ∈L(w)}
sC = {w ∈W | w has a unique rex with s ∈L(w)}
s,tA = {w ∈W | L(w) = {s, t}}
B1 = us(At,u \ (u(s,tA) ∪t(As,u)))
A1 = Au \ (uC ∪B1)
Among these, Ctriv, uC, B1 and A1 are anti-spherical, s,tA is a spherical
Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell and uC as well as sC contain only elements with a
unique reduced expression.


PDF PAGE 110
104
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
10.4.2
Unique reduced expression cells
As in previous pictures, in Figure 6 each point v marks a right Wv-coset in
which we are interested in the right Wv-string marked by an arrow. Applying
Lemma 5.10 to these strings shows the following:
Proposition 10.18. Each Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell containing elements with
a unique reduced expression is a right p-cell for p > 2.
Figure 6: Right strings in the unique reduced expression cells in type eC2
10.4.3
Strategy for the remaining cell on the wall
In order to motivate our strategy to determine the decomposition behaviour of
the remaining Kazhdan-Lusztig cell, we need to explain some deep results from
Kazhdan-Lusztig cell theory:
We denote by G∨
C the simply-connected, semi-simple, connected algebraic
group obtained from scalar extension of G∨
Z to C. Let g be the Lie algebra of
G∨
C. Denote by N ⊆g the nilpotent cone. The group G∨
C acts on N via the
adjoint action. The nilpotent cone consists of ﬁnitely many G∨
C-orbits, called
nilpotent orbits (see [CM93, Theorem 3.5.4]). We deﬁne a partial order on the
set of nilpotent orbits via O′ ⩽O if and only if O′ ⊆O.
One of the deepest results of Kazhdan-Lusztig cell theory is the following:
In [Lus89, Theorem 4.8] Lusztig constructs a bijection C 7→OC between the
two-sided Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in W and the the set of nilpotent orbits in N
(or equivalently conjugacy classes of unipotent elements in G∨
C). Moreover, this
bijection respects the natural partial orderings, with the trivial two-sided cell


PDF PAGE 111
10.4
eC2
105
{e} corresponding to the regular nilpotent orbit and the lowest two-sided cell
corresponding to the zero orbit (see [Bez09, Theorem 4 b)]).
In [LX88, Theorem 1.2], Lusztig and Xi show that any Kazhdan-Lusztig
two-sided cell intersects fW in a unique right cell. Combining both results, we
obtain a bijection between the anti-spherical Kazhdan-Lusztig right cells and
nilpotent orbits in N.
For an anti-spherical Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell C, denote by nC a represen-
tative of the nilpotent orbit OC. Moreover, denote by FC the maximal reduc-
tive subgroup in the centralizer CG(nC). Riche conjectured that anti-spherical
Kazhdan-Lusztig cells decompose into right p-cells for p > h.
Moreover, he
believes that the group FC should govern the decomposition behaviour of the
Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell C.
Now, we specialize to G∨
C = SP4(C). Riche’s conjecture was the main mo-
tivation for our strategy to determine the decomposition behaviour of the re-
maining anti-spherical Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell B1. Since Lusztig’s bijection
respects the natural partial orderings, the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell B1 corre-
sponds to the minimal nilpotent orbit Omin of sp4(C). For an element n ∈Omin,
one can check that the maximal reductive subgroup in CG(n) is isomorphic to
SL2(C) × {± Id}.
The representation theory of SL2 is closely linked to the Temperley-Lieb
category, as we will explain in several remarks in the following section. For this
reason, our strategy is to construct a functor from the Temperley-Lieb category
to the anti-spherical category. After suitable extension of scalars, the image of
this functor will provide approximations of the idempotents of certain indecom-
posable objects in B1. This will then allow us to determine the decomposition
behaviour of B1.
10.4.4
Decomposing the remaining cell on the wall
The goal of this section is to show that the decomposition behaviour of the
Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell B1 is governed by SL2. For this, we will need to
introduce the Temperley-Lieb category.
A good reference for the Temperley-Lieb algebra and its graphical calculus
is [KT08, §5.7]. For n, m ⩾1 of the same parity, a simple (n, m)-diagram D is
a disjoint union of n+m
2
smoothly embedded, non-intersecting arcs in R × [0, 1]
such that:
• the boundary ∂D of D consists of the points (1, 0), (2, 0), . . . , (n, 0) and
(1, 1), (2, 1), . . . , (m, 1),
• D \ ∂D ⊂R × (0, 1),
• each arc intersects the boundary R × {0, 1} transversally.
We call an isotopy class of a simple (n, m)-diagram relative to the boundary
R × {0, 1} an (n, m) crossingless matching.
The uncoloured Temperley-Lieb category TL is a monoidal category en-
riched over Z[δ]-modules whose objects are natural numbers n ∈N, pictured
as n distinct points on a horizontal line. The space of morphisms from n to m
is a free Z[δ]-module with the set of all (n, m)-crossingless matchings as basis.
The monoidal structure (resp. the composition) is induced by horizontal (resp.


PDF PAGE 112
106
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
vertical) concatenation of the corresponding diagrams where in the composition
of two morphisms each closed loop is resolved to −δ. We will be interested in
Z[ 1
2 ]TL, the scalar extension of TL to Z[ 1
2] in which we specialize δ to 2.
For any commutative ring k with a homomorphism Z[ 1
2] →k, denote by
kNBS the quotient of kBS by the ideal of all objects indexed by Sf-sequences
where an Sf-sequence is any sequence starting in a simple reﬂection in Sf. Deﬁne
kN to be the graded, additive Karoubian completion of kNBS.
Note that, in principle, we only have some control over the indecomposable
objects in kN if k is a complete local ring. Arguing as in [LW17a, Proposition
3.2], one obtains that for a complete local ring k this category is equivalent to
the categoriﬁcation of the anti-spherical category proposed in Section 7.2.
In both categories Z[ 1
2 ]TL and Z[ 1
2 ]N, there exists a duality induced by ﬂip-
ping diagrams upside down. Denote this duality by slight abuse of notation in
both cases by D.
If k is a ﬁeld not of characteristic 2, denote by Jsph the two-sided ideal of
morphisms in kN factoring through a direct sum of shifts of indecomposable
objects indexed by elements in the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell A1. The goal
of this section is to deﬁne a Z[ 1
2]-linear functor F : Z[ 1
2 ]TL −→Z[ 1
2 ]N that
commutes with D and whose image consists of degree 0 morphisms. Moreover,
we will see that for any ﬁeld k not of characteristic 2 the composition
kTL
Fk
−→kN −→kN/Jsph
is full in degree zero. In this composition Fk denotes the functor obtained from
F by extension of scalars and kN −→kN/Jsph is the quotient functor.
Denote by Be the image in Z[ 1
2 ]N of the Bott-Samelson object corresponding
to the empty sequence (i.e. the monoidal unit in Z[ 1
2 ]BS). For n ⩾0 consider
the object
Bn := BeBusuBtstBusu . . .
(
BtstBu
if n is odd,
BusuBt
otherwise.
(17)
in Z[ 1
2 ]N where we act with n + 1 indecomposable objects of the form Busu or
Btst in Z[ 1
2 ]H on Be. One easily checks that
+ 1
2
(18)
is an idempotent in the endomorphism ring of the Bott-Samelson corresponding
to the sequence (t, s, t) which is deﬁned in Z[ 1
2 ]H. Note that we do not have a
classiﬁcation of the indecomposable objects in Z[ 1
2 ]H and thus Btst above should
be understood as the object given by this idempotent (and similarly for Busu
after swapping t and u). Denote by en the idempotent corresponding to Bn
that is obtained by tensoring the idempotents according to (17).
Note that
en lives in the degree 0 piece of the endomorphism ring of the Bott-Samelson
corresponding to the sequence
sn := (u, s, u, t, s, t, u, s, u, . . . ,
(
t, s, t, u)
if n is odd,
u, s, u, t)
otherwise.
(19)


PDF PAGE 113
10.4
eC2
107
of length 3n + 4. Observe that sn is a reduced expression and denote the corre-
sponding element in W by wn. A simple calculation shows that en postcomposed
with any light leaf corresponding to one of the subexpressions
(U1, . . . , U1, U1, U0, D0,
|
{z
}
positions
3i−2, 3i−1, 3i
U1, . . . , U1)
⇝







Id ⊗
⊗Id
if i is even,
Id ⊗
⊗Id
otherwise.
for 1 ⩽i ⩽n + 1 is zero (where the diagram on the right hand side corresponds
to the three marked positions in the subexpression). The result is the same
when precomposing en with the ﬂip of one of these light leaves. When referring
to this, we say that en is killed by a pitchfork.
First, we want to partially calculate the character of Bn. The reader should
think of Bn as the analogue of the n-th tensor power of the natural representa-
tion for SL2.
Deﬁnition 10.19. For n, k ⩾1 deﬁne the integers ck
n be the entry in the n-th
row and k-th column of the following table which is obtained by setting each
entry to be the sum of the one or two entries diagonally below:
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
3
1
5
4
1
5
9
5
1
...
...
Remark 10.20. For SL2(k) we have the following usual identiﬁcations X = Z =
X∨, Φ = ∆= {2} and Φ∨= ∆∨= {1}.
Let V = ∇(1) denote the two-dimensional, standard representation and
denote by L(n) the irreducible representation of SL2(k) with highest weight n.
If k is of characteristic 0, then we have the following well-known relations:
L(n) ∼= ∇(n) for all n ⩾0,
L(0) ⊗V ∼= L(1) = V ,
L(n) ⊗V ∼= L(n + 1) ⊕L(n −1) for n ⩾1.
Therefore, the decomposition of V ⊗(n−1) into irreducible representations in
characteristic 0 is given by
V ⊗(n−1) ∼=
M
k⩽n
L(k −1)⊕ck
n.
The reader should compare this with the lemma below.
Lemma 10.21. We have ch(Bn) = P
k⩽n ck+1
n+1N wk modulo L
x∈A1 Z[v, v−1]N x.
Proof. Using ch(Busu) = HuHsHu −Hu and similarly for ch(Btst), we ﬁrst
verify:
ch(B0) = N w0


PDF PAGE 114
108
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
ch(B1) = N w1
Calculating the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis in the anti-spherical module, one quickly
notices that N wk are given by the same local pattern for k ⩾2 which we call the
generic pattern. The following picture illustrates this pattern for k even which
we will assume without loss of generality for the rest of this proof. For k odd
one simply has to swap the roles of u and t:
1
v
v
v2
v
v2
v2
v3
. . .
(20)
Then we calculate modulo L
x∈A1 Z[v, v−1]N x:
N wkHsHt = N wkst + N wk
⇒N wk(HsHt −He) = N wkst
N wkstHu = N wk+1 + N wk−1
This shows that the elements {N wk | k ⩾1} exhibit precisely the combinatorics
of the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis of the inﬁnite dihedral group under the translation
wk ⇝wk+1 which is used to populate the deﬁning table for the coeﬃcients cl
n
given above. Therefore, the formula for the characters of en follows.
Next, we want to deﬁne certain anti-spherical light leaves. For k ⩽n −1
deﬁne LLk
n to be the light leaf given by the following subexpression of sn:
(U1, . . . , U1, U1, U1, U1, U0, U0, D1, D0, D0,
|
{z
}
positions
3k, 3k+1, ..., 3k+7
U1, . . . , U1)
where the marked positions correspond to simple reﬂections t, u, s, u, t, s, t, u (or
u, t, s, t, u, s, u, t) if k is even (resp. odd). Therefore, LLk
n looks for k even as
follows:
Id ⊗
⊗Id
where the diagram again corresponds to the marked positions. Observe that
LLk
n ends in sn−2 and is of degree 0.
The following proposition summarizes several properties of these light leaves.
The reader should think of LLk
n as a cap connecting the strands k and k + 1 as
a morphism from n →n −2 in Z[ 1
2 ]TL.
Proposition 10.22. The light leaves LLk
n for 1 ⩽k ⩽n−1 satisfy the following
properties:
(i) LLk
n ◦en ◦(DLLk
n) = −2en−2,
(ii) LLk
n ◦en ◦(DLLk−1
n
) = en−2 = LLk−1
n
◦en ◦(DLLk
n) if k ⩾2,
(iii) LLk
n◦(DLLl
n) = (DLLl−2
n−2)◦LLk
n−2 and LLl
n◦(DLLk
n) = (DLLk
n−2)◦LLl−2
n−2
for l ⩾k + 2,


PDF PAGE 115
10.4
eC2
109
(iv) LLl
n−2 ◦LLk
n = LLk
n−2 ◦LLl+2
n
for l ⩾k,
(v) Any well-deﬁned composition of l-terms of the form LLk
m starting in sn can
be brought in the form LLkl
n−2l ◦· · · ◦LLk1
n−2 ◦LLk0
n with k0 > k1 > · · · > kl
and is still an anti-spherical light leaf.
Proof. LLk
n commutes with any idempotent that one obtains from (18) (or the
corresponding version for usu) by tensoring with identities (on the left and on
the right) if the idempotent does not occupy the strands 3k+1, 3k+2, . . . , 3k+6.
For this reason (i) reduces for k even to the following calculation:
+ 1
2
+ 1
2
+ 1
4
= −2
where the end result is based on the following calculation using Demazure op-
erators:
αsαt
∂u
7−→−2αt
∂t
7−→−4
α2
s
∂u
7−→−4αs −4αu
∂t
7−→8
(ii) is a slightly more involved calculation.
We will only prove the ﬁrst
equality in (ii), the second one follows from the ﬁrst one by applying the duality
D and using that all en’s are self-dual. First, observe that LLk
n ◦en for k even
reduces to:
en−2 ◦




Id ⊗




+ 1
2
+ 1
2
+ 1
4



⊗Id





where the diagrams occupy the strands 3k, 3k + 1, . . . , 3k + 7 of sn. Precompo-
sition with DLLk−1
n
yields:
en−2 ◦






Id ⊗





+ 1
2
+ 1
2
+ 1
4
αs




⊗Id






where the diagrams occupy the strands 3k −2, 3k −1, . . . , 3k + 4 of sn−2. The
third term dies as en−2 is killed by the pitchfork. Sliding αs through the hori-
zontal u-coloured line in the fourth term, gives another term that dies as en−2
is killed by the resulting pitchfork. The other summand resulting from the ap-
plication of the nil Hecke relation (see (5)) in the fourth term cancels with the
second term as ∂u(αs) = −2. This ﬁnishes the proof of (ii). (iii) and (iv) are
immediate from the deﬁnitions.
The given normal form in (v) follows from (iv).
We prove the last part
by induction on the length of this normal form.
We may assume that any


PDF PAGE 116
110
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
composition of l-terms of the form LLk
m are anti-spherical light leaves. Given
such a composition of length l + 1, we bring it into the normal form LLkl
n−2l ◦
· · · ◦LLk1
n−2 ◦LLk0
n with k0 > k1 > · · · > kl.
Note that this composition does not contain any 2ms,u- or 2ms,t-valent ver-
tices, but potentially 2mt,u-valent vertices. Thus, we may speak of the com-
ponent of a strand, meaning all strands of the same colour that are connected
to it in a topological sense. It is easy to see that the component of any t or
u-coloured strand is a binary tree that, when read from bottom to top, either
ends in a dot or intersects non-trivially the top boundary of the diagram.
By the induction hypothesis, the composition of the ﬁrst l terms gives an
anti-spherical light leaf g corresponding to the subexpression f of sn ending in
sn−2l such that
• the ﬁrst 3kl−1 + 2 entries of the decoration of f are all U1’s,
• for any entry in sn−2l following the left- (resp. right-) most branch of the
corresponding component in g from the top of the diagram to the bottom,
one ends up in a position of f decorated with U1 (resp. D0).
We will explain how to modify f to obtain a subexpression of sn that shows
that the composition of all l + 1-terms is still an anti-spherical light leaf. In the
case kl−1−kl ⩾2, we modify f by overwriting the positions 3kl, 3kl+1, . . . 3kl+7
(which covers at most the positions 3kl−1 and 3kl−1 + 1) with the following:
. . . , U1, U1, U1, U0, U0, D1, D0, D0, . . .
Note that the remaining decorations do not change as the elements wkl−1 and
wkl+1 behave combinatorially in the same way. In other words, for the remaining
decorations it does not matter whether we ﬁnd ourselves after a certain number
of steps of the Bruhat stroll in wkl−1 or wkl+1.
For the case kl−1 = kl + 1, the reader should remember that, when adding
a cap to a cap-diagram in the Temperley category in such a way that the cap
connects two strands that are not neighbouring in the domain, several other
caps are “buried” under this cap. In this case, consider the entry at position
3kl + 3 = 3kl−1 in sn−2l and trace the right-most strand of the corresponding
component from the top of the diagram representing g to the bottom and denote
the resulting position by m. We will change f in the positions m, m+1, . . . , m+4
from
. . . , D0, D0, U1, U1, U1, . . .
to
. . . , D1, D1, D1, D0, D0, . . .
Note that these positions correspond to the simple reﬂections
(
. . . , t, u, s, u, t, . . .
if kl is odd,
. . . , u, t, s, t, u, . . .
otherwise.
Again, the remaining decorations do not change and the result is an anti-
spherical light leaf! The reader easily veriﬁes that the three properties stated
above are preserved under our modiﬁcations in both cases.
If the isotopy class [D] of a simple (n, k)-diagram contains a representative
with only “caps” (local maxima) and no “cups” (local minima), we say that


PDF PAGE 117
10.4
eC2
111
[D] is a caps-diagram. The notion of a cups-diagram is deﬁned similary. The
endomorphism ring of any object in the Temperley Lieb category is a cellular
algebra as introduced by [GL96]. (Note that there are other cellular structures
on the Temperley-Lieb algebra as explained in [AST15, §5.2].) This motivates
the following observation: Any crossingless matching f : n →m can be factored
as f = f+ ◦f−where f−: n →k is a caps-diagram, f+ : k →m is a cups-
diagram, and k ⩽min{m, n} is of the same parity as n and m. In this case, f
does not factor through any object l with l < k and we say that f has k through-
strands. We will need the following easy lemma from [Che14, Corollary 2.2.6]:
Lemma 10.23. The class Ik of all morphisms with at most k through-strands
forms a two-sided ideal in TL.
In the quotient TL/Il−1 the Hom-space Hom(n, l) is a free Z[δ]-module with
basis given by the set Caps(n, l) of all caps-diagrams n →l. Similarly, the set
Cups(l, n) of all cups-diagrams is a basis of the free Z[δ]-module Hom(l, n) in
the quotient TL/Il−1. The following lemma is immediate:
Lemma 10.24. D gives a bijection Caps(n, l) −→Cups(l, n).
Finally, we can deﬁne the functor F : Z[ 1
2 ]TL −→Z[ 1
2 ]N. F sends n ∈N
to the object Bn in Z[ 1
2 ]N. Note that Bn is self-dual. We will deﬁne F on
any crossingless matching f : n →m and extend the functor Z[ 1
2]-linearly. We
write f = f+ ◦f−and assume without loss of generality that f has l through-
strands. Since we want F to satisfy F ◦D = D ◦F, it is enough to deﬁne F on
f−∈Caps(n, l) by Lemma 10.24. Since f−has an isotopy representative with
only caps and no cups, F(f−) is uniquely determined by setting
F




. . .
l
. . .
m



= em−2 ◦LLl
m ◦em
for all l ⩽m −1 and m ∈N.
Corollary 10.25. F is a well-deﬁned, Z[ 1
2]-linear functor that commutes with
D and whose image consists of degree 0 morphisms.
Proof. All stated properties of F are clear from the deﬁnition. It remains to
check that F is well-deﬁned. Observe that we used a speciﬁc representative
in the isotopy class of a crossingless matching to deﬁne F on morphisms. For
this reason, we need to show that the image of the functor does not depend on
this choice and that F is well-deﬁned under composition. Proposition 10.22(ii),
(iii) and (iv) show that all isotopy relations also hold in Z[ 1
2 ]N. Composing two
crossingless matchings in Z[ 1
2 ]TL may result in closed components. Proposi-
tion 10.22 (i) shows that the removal of closed components in Z[ 1
2 ]TL and in
Z[ 1
2 ]N yields the same result.
Next, we are going to show that, after extending scalars to k, the functor
Fk maps Caps(n, l) for all l ⩽n to a linear independent set of morphisms which
projects to a generating set of morphisms Bn →Bl in degree 0 modulo lower
terms in the quotient kN/Jsph.


PDF PAGE 118
112
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
Lemma 10.26. There is a bijection
Caps(n, l −1) ∪Caps(n, l + 1) −→Caps(n + 1, l)
given by adding a strand on the right to an element in Caps(n, l −1) or adding
a strand on the right to an element in Caps(n, l + 1) and post-composing with a
cap on the strands l + 1 and l + 2.
Proof. Given an element in Caps(n + 1, l), consider the isotopy representative
D with only caps and no cups. The right-most strand in D is either a through-
strand or contains a cap.
In the ﬁrst case, it can be removed to obtain a
representative of an isotopy class in Caps(n, l −1). In the second case, add
a strand on the right to D and pre-compose with a cup on the strands n + 1
and n + 2. By straightening the corresponding strand, we ﬁnd in the isotopy
class of the resulting simple (n, l +1)-diagram a representative in Caps(n, l +1).
This procedure gives an inverse to the map described above and ﬁnishes the
proof.
Recall that Caps(n, l) is empty if n and l are not of the same parity. In ad-
dition, Caps(0, 0) and Caps(1, 1) both contain a single element - the empty dia-
gram is contained in Caps(0, 0). These observations together with Lemma 10.26
imply the following result, as the set Caps(n, l) is governed by the same combi-
natorics as the coeﬃcients cl+1
n+1:
Corollary 10.27. We have for n, l ⩾0: |Caps(n, l)| = cl+1
n+1 = |Cups(l, n)|
Remark 10.28. Back to the setting of SL2(k) representations for an algebraically
closed ﬁeld k of characteristic 0 or p > 2: Arguing as in [EL17a, Lemma
A.7] (or [DPS98, Theorem 6.3] and [Här99]), we get an isomorphism kTLn ∼=
EndSL2(k)(V ⊗n). Therefore, the Temperley Lieb algebra kTLn = EndkTL(n)
contains the idempotents corresponding to the indecomposable summands in
V ⊗n.
In characteristic 0, the canonical idempotent corresponding to L(n)
⊕
⊆V ⊗n
is known as the Jones-Wenzl projector as it was studied independently by Jones
in [Jon86] and Wenzl in [Wen87].
In characteristic p > 2, V is a tilting module and thus V ⊗n can be de-
composed into indecomposable tilting modules.
The idempotents giving the
indecomposable summands isomorphic to T(l) in V ⊗n can, for example, be
obtained in the following way: Consider the following intersection pairing
HomTL/Il−1(n, l) × HomTL/Il−1(n, l) −→EndTL/Il−1(l) = k
that maps (f, g) to g◦(Df). Recall that Caps(n, l) gives a basis of HomTL/Ik−1(n, k).
First, we bring the matrix representing this pairing in this basis into the Smith
normal form. By keeping track of the bases in the process, we obtain the pro-
jections and inclusions and thus the primitive orthogonal idempotents for the
indecomposable summands isomorphic to T(k).
Finally, the idempotent for
T(n) is the complementary idempotent to the sum of all idempotents obtained
in this way for k < n.
For x ∈fW denote by kN≮x the quotient of kN by the two-sided ideal of
morphisms factoring through a direct sum of grading shifts of reduced expres-
sions y for y < x. By slight abuse of notation, we will write Hom≮x(−, −) for


PDF PAGE 119
10.4
eC2
113
the homomorphism spaces in kN≮x (as we only work with homomorphisms in
the anti-spherical module and not the Hecke category in this section).
For two elements x < y in fW, let y be an arbitrary expression for y and
x be a reduced expression for x. The deﬁnition of light leaves is tailor-made to
give bases of the Hom-spaces Hom≮x(y, x) that may be translated along as one
calculates the character of y. By deﬁnition of the diagrammatic character, the
coeﬃcient in front of Nx in ch(B) gives the graded rank of the free RSf-module
Hom≮x(B, x) for an arbitrary object B ∈kN.
For n ⩾1 denote by
esn := (u, s, u, t, s, t, u, s, u, . . . ,
(
u, s, u, t, s)
if n is odd,
t, s, t, u, s)
otherwise.
of length 3n+2. esn is a reduced expression for the element ewn := wntu of length
l( ewn) = l(wn) −2. Observe that sk and esk are starting pieces of sn for k ⩽n.
For any element x ∈fW ﬁx a reduced expression x such that there is no
other reduced expression of x for which a longer starting piece coincides with
a starting piece of sn for n ≫0. In order to show that the functor Fk post-
composed with the quotient functor kN →kN/Jsph is full in degree 0, we will
construct for n ⩾0 a set Bn of morphisms
[
v∈f W
{fe : sn →v | e subexpression of x expressing v}
using the light leaves algorithm. Moreover, we will deﬁne for l ⩽n with l ≡
n (mod 2) a subset of anti-spherical light leaves LLs(n, l) ⊂Bn from sn →sl
of degree 0. Our construction will ensure that
(i) for any element v ⩽wn, the set
{fe ∈Bn | e subexpression of sn expressing v}
gives a basis of the free RSf-module Hom≮v(sn, v),
(ii) pre-composing LLs(n, l) with en yields Fk(Caps(n, l)),
(iii) any element fe ∈Bn \ LLs(n, l) indexed by a subexpression e of sn ex-
pressing wl lies in J •
sph(sn, sl) or is zero when pre-composed with en.
(iv) Denote by g
LLs(n, l) the following set:







































Id(esl)
. . .
. . .


◦ll

ll ∈LLs(n, l)







if l is even,










Id(esl)
. . .
. . .


◦ll

ll ∈LLs(n, l)







otherwise.
Then any element fe ∈Bn \ g
LLs(n, l) indexed by a subexpression e of sn
expressing ewl lies in J •
sph(sn,esl) or is zero when pre-composed with en.


PDF PAGE 120
114
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
Therefore, properties (ii) and (iii) will immediately imply the following re-
sult:
Proposition 10.29. kTL
Fk
−→kN −→kN/Jsph is full in degree 0.
Let us ﬁrst prove some auxiliary results:
Lemma 10.30. Jsph is a tensor ideal, i.e. is stable under tensoring with Bs ∈
kH for s ∈S.
Proof. Corollary 10.1 implies that the full subcategory ⟨Bx | x ∈A1⟩(−),⊕in
kN is stable under the action of the generators Bs ∈kH for s ∈S. Therefore,
the claim follows.
Recall that, for two expressions x and y in S, we denote their concatenation
by x⌢y.
In the process of the light leaves algorithm, we may interrupt the
algorithm after completing all the steps for a suitable starting piece of our
expression, modify the basis modulo lower terms that we have and continue the
algorithm. For any morphism produced by the algorithm we allow at most one
of the following modiﬁcations in the course of the algorithm:
(i) Let LLx,e be an anti-spherical light leaf corresponding to a subexpression
e of x of length n such that the subexpression e⩽n−1 of x⩽n−1 avoids A1,
but e does not. Let r ∈S be the last reﬂection in x. This implies that
(x
e⩽n−1
⩽n−1 )•r ∈A1
and denote the corresponding element by y. Observe that the last bit of
e is decorated with a U. Consider the reduced expression y of y obtained
from x
e⩽n−1⌢
⩽n−1
(r) and the idempotent ey for kBy in the corresponding
anti-spherical Bott-Samelson. In this case, we will replace LLx,e by the
morphism obtained by completing the last step of the light leaves algo-
rithm using
ey ◦(LLx⩽n−1,e⩽n−1 ⊗IdkBr)
instead of LLx⩽n−1,e⩽n−1 ⊗IdkBr (see [EW16, Construction 6.1]).
(ii) Given two elements x, y ∈fW \ A1 and reduced expressions x and y for
them, let f : x →y be a morphism factoring through an indecomposable
object indexed by an element in A1. Assume that we can explicitly express
f in terms of the unmodiﬁed light leaves basis of Hom•
≮y(x, y) . Assume
further that there exists a subexpression e of x that is the maximum
with respect to the path dominance order among all the subexpressions of
maximal defect indexing light leaves that occur with non-trivial coeﬃcient
in the expression for f. If the coeﬃcients in front of LLx,e is invertible
in RSf and LLx,e is still part of the (modiﬁed) basis at that stage of the
algorithm, then we can replace LLx,e by f.
The ﬁrst modiﬁcation allows us to replace every anti-spherical light leaves LLx,e :
x →w corresponding to a subexpression e of x that does not avoid A1 by a
map in Jsph. Similarly, the second modiﬁcation allows to replace certain anti-
spherical light leaves by maps in Jsph. Using Lemma 10.30 and the deﬁnition


PDF PAGE 121
10.4
eC2
115
of an ideal in a category, we see that the corresponding maps remain in Jsph
when continuing the light leaves algorithm.
In the following lemma, we show that both of these modiﬁcations preserve
the property of being a basis modulo lower terms after continuing the algorithm:
Lemma 10.31. Let x, y ∈fW \ A1 and x (resp. y) be a reduced expression for
x (resp. y). Performing the anti-spherical light leaves algorithm and allowing
modiﬁcations as described above still produces a basis of the free RSf-module
Hom•
≮y(x, y).
Proof. Let us express the set of morphisms obtained from the algorithm while
allowing the modiﬁcations in the set of light leaves produced by the light leaves
algorithm using the same choices, but not allowing the modiﬁcations in between.
We want to argue that the corresponding matrix is upper triangular with in-
vertible elements on the diagonal. For this we want to order the basis using a
total order reﬁning the lexicographic order on
Z × {e | e subexpression of x expressing y}
where the second factor is equipped with the path dominance order and where
we associate to each basis element lle the pair (deg(lle), e).
For the second type of modiﬁcation it is clear that after replacing a suitably
chosen basis element by a non-trivial linear combination and continuing the
light leaves algorithm, the coeﬃcients in the linear combination do not change
and only the corresponding light leaves are modiﬁed by the algorithm. Thus,
the claim follows for this morphism from our assumptions.
For a morphism to which we applied a modiﬁcation of the ﬁrst type, we get
after continuing the algorithm
LL ⊗Id
?
Id
LL’
x
y
(21)
where the question mark represents the idempotent we introduced. We know
that the idempotent is an element of EndkN(exp z) for some reduced expression
z. Observe that the idempotent we introduced corresponds to the “big” inde-
composable object in z, i.e. when expressing it in terms of the anti-spherical
double leaves basis the coeﬃcient in front of the identity is 1.
We want to
argue that, when expressing this morphism in terms of the anti-spherical light
leaves, the light leaf corresponding to the same subsequence occurs with co-
eﬃcient 1 and all other terms are indexed by elements strictly smaller in the
path dominance order. Observe that, when expressing the idempotent in the
anti-spherical double leaves basis, all occuring terms apart from the identity
factor through a sequence of length two smaller than z. Using “path dominance


PDF PAGE 122
116
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
upper-triangularity” of light leaves (see [EW16, Proposition 6.6]) and localiza-
tion techniques in kH, we can deduce the claim in kN following closely the proof
of [RW16, Lemma 4.9].
In our case, the idempotents en are so close to the Bott-Samelson objects
sn ∈kN that we can show that the set Fk(Caps(n, l)) is linear independent
in Hom≮wl(Bn, wl). It is still not clear to us, though, whether the image of
the set Fk(Caps(n, l)) is linear independent in Hom(Bn, wl) in the quotient
(kN/Jsph)̸<wl.
We will construct the sets Bn and LLs(n, l) by induction on n. The main
idea of the proof is to translate a basis modulo lower terms along as we calculate
the character of Bn. For the induction start, the reader easily veriﬁes that the
following picture gives ch(B0):
1
v
v
v2
(22)
We set LLs(0, 0) = {Id(s0)} (corresponding to the coeﬃcient 1 in (22)) and
choose arbitrary anti-spherical light leaves to extend LLs(0, 0) to B0. It is easy
to see that the claims (i) - (iv) hold. For the induction step from n to n + 1,
let us assume that the statement of the claims (i) to (iv) hold for l ⩽n with
l ≡n (mod 2). Observe that all the claims about LLs(n + 1, l) are clear for
l = n + 1. Thus, ﬁx l < n + 1 with l ≡n + 1 (mod 2).
First, we deal with the more diﬃcult case of explaining the contribution of
LLs(n, l + 1) to LLs(n + 1, l) as in Lemma 10.26. We will illustrate the trans-
lation process by translating N wl+1 along. The reader should imagine that the
alcove with the coeﬃcient 1 in (20) corresponds to wl+1. Apart from the alcove
corresponding to the identity in W, we will mark another alcove for which we
are most interested in the corresponding light leaves. Without loss of generality
n and l + 1 are even (to match the pictures). Applying Hs to N wl+1 yields:
1
v
v
v2
2v
2v2
v2
v3
v2
v3
. . .
(23)
The set g
LLs(n, l+1) (given by property (iv)) contains anti-spherical light leaves
ending in esl+1, which is a reduced expression for the element corresponding to
the orange-shaded alcove in (20). We want to translate these along. In the last
step, they moved down and contributed to the coeﬃcient in the orange-shaded
alcove in (23) in the following form:










Id
. . .
. . .


◦ll | ll ∈LLs(n, l + 1)







They mingle with (at least) |LLs(n, l + 1)| anti-spherical light leaves of degree


PDF PAGE 123
10.4
eC2
117
1 in that alcove that are of the form:
. . .
. . .
LL
(24)
Multiplying with Ht gives:
1
v
1
v
1
v
3v
3v2
v3 + 2v
v4 + 2v2
v3
v2
v3
v2
v2
v3
. . .
(25)
A calculation shows that N wl+1us is given by the following picture:
1
v
v
v2
v3
v4
v3
v2
. . .
(26)
We will justify the removal of this piece from the picture later. Moreover, since
we want to act with Btst and not with the Bott-Samelson corresponding to
(t, s, t), we need to remove N wl+1 on the level of the characters. The result is:
1
v
v
v2
v
v2
v2
v3
. . .
(27)
On the level of light leaves, this corresponds to pre-composing with an idempo-
tent that is a horizontal concatenation of idempotents of the form given in (18).
As mentioned for en, such an idempotent is killed by certain pitchforks. For
this reason, among the light leaves that give 0 when pre-composed with such an
idempotent are those to which we applied ﬁrst a U0 when translating along s
and then a D0 for t. Examples of those light leaves are the ones given in (24)
which contribute to the orange-shaded alcove in (25) as follows:
. . .
. . .
LL
(28)
Thus, all light leaves of this form give 0 when pre-composed with the idempotent.
And this remains true for any anti-spherical extension of these morphisms using
the light leaves algorithm. This argument or degree reasons justify the removal
of ch(Bwl+1) from the picture. Note that the corresponding morphisms will still


PDF PAGE 124
118
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
be further translated along and added to Bn+1 in the end. Since we can identify
enough anti-spherical light leaves from sn
⌢(s, t) to sl to remove, it will follow
that the set Fk(Caps(n+1, l)) is linear independent in Hom≮wl(Bn+1, sl) using
the anti-spherical Hom-formula from Section 7.3.
Applying a D0 to the set of light leaves we are interested in gives:










Id
. . .
. . .


◦ll | ll ∈LLs(n, l + 1)







(29)
Let us come back to the removal of several copies of N wl+1us: For every co-
eﬃcient in (26) there exists a subexpression e of s ⌢
n
(s, t) such that the subex-
pression itself does not avoid A1, but removing the last two entries results in a
subexpression of sn that avoids A1. According to Lemma 10.31, we may replace
the corresponding anti-spherical light leaves by elements in Jsph, preserving the
basis property modulo lower terms. As explained in Lemma 10.31, any anti-
spherical extension of these morphisms will be in Jsph. It should also be noted
that, even though we remove the corresponding coeﬃcients here, we still have
to translate the corresponding basis elements along to add to Bn+1 in the end.
The attentive reader will most likely have noticed that there are the following
two minor gaps in our argument:
• For the alcoves corresponding to the elements wls and wlst, the subex-
pressions of sn
⌢(s, t) mentioned above that do not avoid A1 correspond
to anti-spherical light leaves that give 0 when pre-composed with an idem-
potent that is a tensor product of idempotents of the form given in (18).
We will explain how to proceed for wls, the situation for wlst is sim-
ilar and easier.
In this case, we want to calculate the composition of
an anti-spherical light leaf LL which we have translated along starting in
s ⌢
n
(s, t) and ending in s ⌢
l
(s, t, s), followed by the idempotent for kBwlsts
(in the correct Bott-Samelson) and the unique anti-spherical light leaf from
s ⌢
l
(s, t, s) to s ⌢
l
(s). Even though we do not know the idempotent for
kBwlsts, one can still compute this composition in kN≮wls for the following
reasons: We want to argue that only the identity term in the idempotent
for kBwlsts can contribute to this composition. Indeed, observe that the
element wls is of length l(wl+1us) −2 = l(wl + 1). Moreover, one can
check that the only subexpressions of s ⌢
l
(s, t, s) expressing wls of defect
zero are of the form
(U1, . . . , U1,
(
U1, U0, D0, U1)
or
U1, U1, U0, D0).
Thus, both contain a pitchfork on the {s, t}-coloured stands among the last
ﬁve letters. Moreover, the projections (and inclusions) potentially realizing
kBwls as a summand of the Bott-Samelson corresponding to s ⌢
l
(s, t, s)
are linear combinations of the corresponding anti-spherical light leaves (or
their ﬂips). By retracing the translation process of LL, we see that it is


PDF PAGE 125
10.4
eC2
119
of the following form
Id
. . .
. . .
ll
for an element ll ∈LLs(n, l + 1) (using a consequence of property (iv)).
Thus LL is killed by the pitchforks mentioned above and the claim follows
for codimension reasons.
The resulting composition can be explicitly calculated to determine a non-
zero morphism factoring through kBwlsts that we can use to perform a
modiﬁcation of the second type. For this, add dots on the last two strands
and calculate modulo lower terms and terms that die when pre-composed
with a tensor product of idempotents of the form given in (18). The result
is:
2
Id
. . .
. . .
ll
+
Id
. . .
. . .
ll
The ﬁrst term is one of anti-spherical light leaves contributing to the
coeﬃcient in the alcove of wls. The second term can be written as a sum
of anti-spherical light leaves that are indexed by a subsequence strictly
smaller in the path dominance order. To see this, note that we can rewrite
the second term without the last red and blue dotted strand in terms of
anti-spherical light leaves sn −→sl modulo lower terms and use “path
dominance upper triangularity” of light leaves and localization in kH.
• Our argument justifying the removal of the coeﬃcients corresponding to
N wl+1us does not cover the case of translating N w0 to N w1. In this case,
one can explicitly calculate the idempotent for the modular indecompos-
able object corresponding to w1ts. Similar arguments as above allow us
to perform enough modiﬁcations of the second type to justify the removal
of the coeﬃcients.
Finally, applying Hu to the character shown in (27) yields:
1
v
v
v2
v
v2
v2
v3
1
v
v
v2
v
v2
v2
v3
. . .
(30)
This last step amounts to applying another D0 to the anti-spherical light leaves
given in (29), so that we get
{LLl+1
l+2 ◦ll | ll ∈LLs(n, l + 1)}.
This will be the contribution of LLs(n, l + 1) to LLs(n + 1, l). What we have
done corresponds on the side of the Temperley-Lieb category precisely to adding
another strand on the right and post-composing with a cap on the strands l + 1
and l + 2.


PDF PAGE 126
120
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
Next, we deal with the contribution of LLs(n, l −1) to LLs(n + 1, l) as
in Lemma 10.26. Since n and l −1 are of the same parity, the sequence of
simple reﬂections needed to extend sn to sn+1 is the same sequence needed to
extend sl−1 to sl. In the case illustrated above, this sequence was (s, t, u). For
this reason, when translating the light leaves in LLs(n, l −1) along, we have
to apply a U1 in each step, simply adding a new strand on the right.
The
resulting anti-spherical light leaves will be the contribution of LLs(n, l −1) to
LLs(n+1, l) and ﬁnish the construction of LLs(n+1, l). Observe that the whole
translation process again corresponds on the side of the Temperley-Lieb category
to adding another strand on the right. Therefore, comparing the construction
of LLs(n + 1, l) with the proof of Lemma 10.26, we see that property (ii) is
preserved. Property (iv) is easily seen to hold, when following the path of the
corresponding light leaves in the translation process.
The set Bn+1 is obtained by translating the morphisms in Bn and modifying
them as described above for all l < n+1 of the same parity. Property (i) follows
from the correctness of the light leaves algorithm and property (iii) is clear from
the construction.
The reader should compare the following result with Proposition 9.3:
Corollary 10.32. The Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell B1 decomposes into right
p-cells as follows:
B1 =
[
r∈N
{wl, wls, wlst, wlsu | pr −1 ⩽l < pr+1 −1}.
Proof. First, observe that the Kazhdan-Lusztig right cell B1 is partitioned into
clusters of four elements as follows:
B1 =
[
l⩾0
{wl, wls, wlst, wlsu}
The alcoves of a cluster are depicted in the following picture where wl is the
orange-shaded alcove:
. . .
. . .
(31)
Applying Lemma 5.10 to the strings shown in the last picture gives us that the
four elements of each cluster lie in the same right p-cell.
Note that the elements {wl | l ⩾0} are the only elements in B1 with {t, u}
as right descent set. Combining this with Proposition 3.10(v) and the results
from Section 10.1, we get
pHwn =
X
l⩽n
pmwl,wnHwl
(mod
M
x∈A1
Z[v, v−1]Hx).
In the quotient kN/Jsph an indecomposable object Bx for x ∈fW dies if and
only if x ∈A1. Thus, when decomposing Bn into indecomposable summands
to determine the idempotent for Bwn in kN, the quotient kN/Jsph gives an
approximation of this idempotent up to terms corresponding to indecomposable
summands indexed by elements in A1.


PDF PAGE 127
10.4
eC2
121
Lemma 10.21 shows that in order to calculate the idempotent for Bwn we
need to calculate only the degree 0 local intersection forms of Bn at Bwl for l < n.
Fix l < n. Recall that Fk(Caps(n, l))
(ii)
= LLs(n, l) ◦en is a linear independent
subset of HomkN≮wl (Bn, wl). By property (iii) we can extend LLs(n, l) with
elements from Bn that lie in J •
sph(Bn, Bwl) to a basis of Hom•
kN≮wl (Bn, wl).
Denote by I0
Bn,wl the matrix representing the degree 0 local intersection form
of Bn at Bwl with respect to this basis. Denote by A the matrix representing
the intersection form
HomkTL/Il−1(n, l) × HomkTL/Il−1(n, l) −→EndkTL/Il−1(l) = k
(g, f)
7−→g ◦Df
with respect to the basis Caps(n, l).
It follows that A gives a cl+1
n+1 × cl+1
n+1-
submatrix of I0
Bn,wl.
Therefore, we have [Bn : Bwl] ⩾[V ⊗n : T(l)] where
[V ⊗n : T(l)] is the multiplicity of T(l) in V ⊗n for SL2(k).
We claim that we actually have equality. In other words, the rank of I0
Bn,wl
coincides with the rank of A. Pairing any basis element in J •
sph(Bn, Bwl) with
any other basis element has to give 0. Otherwise, Bwl would be a summand
of an object X whose identity lies in Jsph. In particular, Bwl would vanish in
kN/Jsph contradicting the fact that wl ̸∈A1.
We claim:
pmwl,wn = [T(n) : ∇(l)] for all 0 ⩽l ⩽n
(∗n)
where [T(n) : ∇(l)] is the multiplicity of ∇(l) in T(n) for SL2(k) as given
in Lemma 9.1.
For the proof, we proceed by induction on n.
The equality
pN w0 = N w0 gives the induction start. For the induction step, we assume (∗l)
to hold for l < n. First, express pN wn = ch(Bn) −P
l<n[V ⊗n : T(l)] pHwl
in the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis using Lemma 10.21. Then apply the induction
hypothesis and the formula
[T(n) : ∇(m)] = cm+1
n+1 −
X
m⩽l<n
[V ⊗n : T(l)][T(l) : ∇(m)]
to deduce (∗n).
Since we can determine the modular weight cells for SL2(k) by hand as
mentioned in Remark 9.4, we know at this point that the following partition
gives a reﬁnement of the right p-cells into which B1 decomposes:
B1 =
[
r∈N
{wl, wls, wlst, wlsu | pr −1 ⩽l < pr+1 −1}
We need to check that no sequence of simple reﬂections taking an element
B1 up introduces additional right p-cell relations between these clusters. Similar
calculations as above show that the action of Hs for s ∈S on the Kazhdan-
Lusztig basis of the cell module associated to B1 can be encoded in the following
graph (as in a W-graph) with all µ-coeﬃcients equal to 1:
. . .
. . .
(32)


PDF PAGE 128
122
10
CELL STRUCTURE IN AFFINE RANK 2
It should be noted that this graph does not capture all non-zero µ-coeﬃcients
between the Weyl group elements corresponding to its vertices, as non-zero µ-
coeﬃcients between elements with the same right descent set do not matter for
the action. Moreover, the graph needs to be suitably truncated as there are no
long edges from the smallest cluster in B1 to elements in uC.
From this graph, we deduce the following identities for l ⩾0 using Corol-
lary 5.7
pHwlHs = pHwls,
pHwlsHr = pHwlsr + pHwl for r ∈{t, u} and
pHwlsrHs = pHwls
modulo L
x∈A1 Z[v, v−1] pHx. Since the occuring p-canonical basis elements in
pHwlstHu and pHwlsuHt are completely determined by the SL2 situation, the
claim follows.
It is quite remarkable that pHwn is perverse modulo L
x∈A1 Z[v, v−1]Hx, but
computer calculations show that, in general, the contribution from L
x∈A1 Z[v, v−1]Hx
is not perverse.
The results in this section determine the decomposition behaviour of B1
for p > 2, so we will illustrate the right p-cells in B1 for p = 3 (even though
p = 3 < 2h −2 = 6):
. . .
(33)
It should be noted that the results of this section together with Section 10.4.2
give modular weight cells for SP4 using Theorem 7.8 and Lemma 6.35.
10.4.5
Spherical cells
Figure 7 shows a box containing elements in s,tA. The same comments as in
Section 10.3.4 apply in this case. Therefore, Lemma 5.10 applied to the two
marked strings in Figure 7 implies in this setting:
Lemma 10.33. If a box contains a spherical element, then all elements in the
box lie in the same right p-cell of W.
Figure 7: Box in s,tA in type aﬃne eC2
For λ ∈X∨
+, consider wλ ∈W. For r ∈Sf, denote by Pω∨
r (λ) the unique
sequence of simple reﬂections needed to extend any reduced expression of wλ to


PDF PAGE 129
10.4
eC2
123
a reduced expression for wλ+ω∨
r . Note that Pω∨
r (λ) only depends on the class of
λ in Ω= X∨/ZΦ∨. For example if σ(Sf) = Sf, then we have:
Pω∨
r (λ) =
(
(u, s, t, s)
if r = s,
(u, s, u)
if r = t.
Fix r ∈Sf for the rest of the section.
Proposition 10.34.
(i) For r = s and Pω∨
s (λ) = (s1, s2, s3, s4), the functor
Bs4 ◦Bs3 ◦Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ : HomkSH(Sf, Sλ) −→HomkSH(Sf, )
can be decomposed as a direct sum
Bs4 ◦Bs3 ◦Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ = (Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ)⊕2 ⊕indSλ+ωs ◦Tω∨
s .
(ii) For r = t and Pω∨
s (λ) = (s1, s2, s3), the functor
Bs3 ◦Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ : HomkSH(Sf, Sλ) −→HomkSH(Sf, )
can be decomposed as a direct sum
Bs3 ◦Bs2 ◦Bs1 ◦indSλ = (Bs1 ◦indSλ)⊕2 ⊕indSλ+ωt ◦Tω∨
t .
In the formulas above, the functor Tω∨
r : HomkSH(Sf, Sλ) −→HomkSH(Sf, Sλ+ω∨
r )
corresponds under the geometric Satake equivalence to the 1-morphism T(ω∨
r ) ∈
Tilt(G∨)ω∨
r .
Proof. The proof is completely analogous to the one of Proposition 10.9, we
only need to use the non-symmetric version of [Eli16, (6.8) for m = 4] which
comes from [Eli16, (A.3)].
Note that the complementary idempotent to the
singular 2mt,s- (or 2ms,u-)valent vertex for r = s (resp. r = t) can be further
decomposed into two orthogonal idempotents.
In order to completely determine the right p-cell structure in type eC2, we
need to show that there are no more right p-cell preorder relations between the
spherical elements than the ones coming from geometric Satake.


PDF PAGE 130
124
REFERENCES
References
[AHR17]
P. N. Achar, W. Hardesty, and S. Riche. On the Humphreys Con-
jecture on support varieties of tilting modules. 2017. eprint: arXiv:
1707.07740 (cit. on pp. 8, 32, 70, 71, 75, 77).
[AR16]
P. N. Achar and S. Riche. “Modular perverse sheaves on ﬂag vari-
eties I: tilting and parity sheaves”. In: Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér.
(4) 49.2 (2016). With a joint appendix with Geordie Williamson,
pp. 325–370. doi: 10.24033/asens.2284 (cit. on p. 5).
[Ach+17a]
P. N. Achar, S. Makisumi, S. Riche, and G. Williamson.
Free-
monodromic mixed tilting sheaves on ﬂag varieties. 2017. eprint:
arXiv:1703.05843 (cit. on pp. 2, 8, 76).
[Ach+17b]
P. N. Achar, S. Makisumi, S. Riche, and G. Williamson. Koszul
duality for Kac-Moody groups and characters of tilting modules.
2017. eprint: arXiv:1706.00183 (cit. on pp. 2, 8, 76, 77, 102).
[And92]
H. H. Andersen. “Tensor products of quantized tilting modules”.
In: Comm. Math. Phys. 149.1 (1992), pp. 149–159 (cit. on p. 7).
[And98]
H. H. Andersen. “Tilting modules for algebraic groups”. In: Alge-
braic groups and their representations (Cambridge, 1997). Vol. 517.
NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci. Kluwer Acad. Publ.,
Dordrecht, 1998, pp. 25–42 (cit. on pp. 66, 68).
[And04]
H. H. Andersen. “Cells in aﬃne Weyl groups and tilting modules”.
In: Representation theory of algebraic groups and quantum groups.
Vol. 40. Adv. Stud. Pure Math. Math. Soc. Japan, Tokyo, 2004,
pp. 1–16 (cit. on pp. 7, 8, 70, 72, 97).
[AP95]
H. H. Andersen and J. Paradowski. “Fusion categories arising from
semisimple Lie algebras”. In: Comm. Math. Phys. 169.3 (1995),
pp. 563–588 (cit. on pp. 71, 73).
[AST15]
H. H. Andersen, C. Stroppel, and D. Tubbenhauer. Cellular struc-
tures using Uq-tilting modules. 2015. eprint: arXiv:1503.00224
(cit. on p. 111).
[Ari96]
S. Ariki. “On the decomposition numbers of the Hecke algebra of
G(m, 1, n)”.
In: J. Math. Kyoto Univ. 36.4 (1996), pp. 789–808
(cit. on p. 1).
[Ari00]
S. Ariki. “Robinson-Schensted correspondence and left cells”. In:
Combinatorial methods in representation theory (Kyoto, 1998). Vol. 28.
Adv. Stud. Pure Math. Kinokuniya, Tokyo, 2000, pp. 1–20 (cit. on
pp. 6, 58).
[BL94]
J. Bernstein and V. Lunts.
Equivariant sheaves and functors.
Vol. 1578. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1994, pp. iv+139 (cit. on pp. 4, 83).
[BB81]
A. Be˘ılinson and J. Bernstein. “Localisation de g-modules”. In: C.
R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math. 292.1 (1981), pp. 15–18 (cit. on
p. 1).


PDF PAGE 131
REFERENCES
125
[Bez09]
R. Bezrukavnikov. “Perverse sheaves on aﬃne ﬂags and nilpotent
cone of the Langlands dual group”. In: Israel J. Math. 170 (2009),
pp. 185–206. doi: 10.1007/s11856-009-0025-x (cit. on p. 105).
[BB05]
A. Björner and F. Brenti. Combinatorics of Coxeter groups. Vol. 231.
Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, New York, 2005, pp. xiv+363
(cit. on pp. 35, 37, 58, 59, 61).
[Bon11]
C. Bonnafé. Representations of SL2(Fq). Vol. 13. Algebra and Ap-
plications. Springer-Verlag London, Ltd., London, 2011, pp. xxii+186.
doi: 10.1007/978-0-85729-157-8 (cit. on p. 91).
[BG15]
C. Bonnafé and M. Geck. “Hecke algebras with unequal parameters
and Vogan’s left cell invariants”. In: Representations of reductive
groups. Vol. 312. Progr. Math. Birkhäuser/Springer, Cham, 2015,
pp. 173–187 (cit. on pp. 44, 56, 57).
[Bou68]
N. Bourbaki. Éléments de mathématique. Fasc. XXXIV. Groupes
et algèbres de Lie. Chapitre IV: Groupes de Coxeter et systèmes de
Tits. Chapitre V: Groupes engendrés par des réﬂexions. Chapitre
VI: systèmes de racines. Actualités Scientiﬁques et Industrielles,
No. 1337. Paris: Hermann, 1968, 288 pp. (loose errata) (cit. on
p. 63).
[Bri98]
M. Brion. “Equivariant cohomology and equivariant intersection
theory”. In: Representation theories and algebraic geometry (Mon-
treal, PQ, 1997). Vol. 514. NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math.
Phys. Sci. Notes by Alvaro Rittatore. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dor-
drecht, 1998, pp. 1–37 (cit. on p. 12).
[BK81]
J.-L. Brylinski and M. Kashiwara. “Kazhdan-Lusztig conjecture
and holonomic systems”. In: Invent. Math. 64.3 (1981), pp. 387–
410. doi: 10.1007/BF01389272 (cit. on p. 1).
[Che14]
J. Chen. The Temperley-Lieb categories and skein modules. 2014.
eprint: arXiv:1502.06845 (cit. on p. 111).
[CPS88]
E. Cline, B. Parshall, and L. Scott. “Finite-dimensional algebras
and highest weight categories”.
In: J. Reine Angew. Math. 391
(1988), pp. 85–99 (cit. on p. 87).
[CM93]
D. H. Collingwood and W. M. McGovern.
Nilpotent orbits in
semisimple Lie algebras. Van Nostrand Reinhold Mathematics Se-
ries. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1993, pp. xiv+186
(cit. on p. 104).
[Dav08]
M. W. Davis. The geometry and topology of Coxeter groups. Vol. 32.
London Mathematical Society Monographs Series. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, NJ, 2008, pp. xvi+584 (cit. on p. 34).
[Deo87]
V. V. Deodhar. “On some geometric aspects of Bruhat orderings.
II. The parabolic analogue of Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials”. In: J.
Algebra 111.2 (1987), pp. 483–506. doi: 10.1016/0021-8693(87)
90232-8 (cit. on p. 74).
[Don93]
S. Donkin. “On tilting modules for algebraic groups”. In: Math. Z.
212.1 (1993), pp. 39–60. doi: 10.1007/BF02571640 (cit. on pp. 8,
66, 67, 69, 88).


PDF PAGE 132
126
REFERENCES
[DH05]
S. Doty and A. Henke. “Decomposition of tensor products of mod-
ular irreducibles for SL2”. In: Q. J. Math. 56.2 (2005), pp. 189–207.
doi: 10.1093/qmath/hah027 (cit. on p. 88).
[DPS98]
J. Du, B. Parshall, and L. Scott. “Quantum Weyl reciprocity and
tilting modules”. In: Comm. Math. Phys. 195.2 (1998), pp. 321–
352. doi: 10.1007/s002200050392 (cit. on p. 112).
[Dye91]
M. Dyer. “On the “Bruhat graph” of a Coxeter system”. In: Com-
positio Math. 78.2 (1991), pp. 185–191 (cit. on p. 35).
[Eli16]
B. Elias. “The two-color Soergel calculus”. In: Compos. Math. 152.2
(2016), pp. 327–398. doi: 10.1112/S0010437X15007587 (cit. on
pp. 3, 12–15, 81, 82, 98, 123).
[Eli17]
B. Elias. “Quantum Satake in type A. Part I”. In: J. Comb. Algebra
1.1 (2017), pp. 63–125. doi: 10.4171/JCA/1-1-4 (cit. on pp. 82,
98–100).
[EK10]
B. Elias and M. Khovanov. “Diagrammatics for Soergel categories”.
In: Int. J. Math. Math. Sci. (2010), Art. ID 978635, 58 (cit. on
pp. 3, 13).
[EL17a]
B. Elias and N. Libedinsky. “Indecomposable Soergel bimodules
for universal Coxeter groups”. In: Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 369.6
(2017). With an appendix by Ben Webster, pp. 3883–3910. doi:
10.1090/tran/6754 (cit. on p. 112).
[EL17b]
B. Elias and I. Losev. Modular representation theory in type A via
Soergel bimodules. 2017. eprint: arXiv:1701.00560 (cit. on p. 2).
[EW14]
B. Elias and G. Williamson. “The Hodge theory of Soergel bimod-
ules”. In: Ann. of Math. (2) 180.3 (2014), pp. 1089–1136. doi:
10.4007/annals.2014.180.3.6 (cit. on pp. 1, 3, 18).
[EW16]
B. Elias and G. Williamson.
“Soergel calculus”.
In: Represent.
Theory 20 (2016), pp. 295–374. doi: 10.1090/ert/481 (cit. on
pp. 3, 11, 13, 15, 16, 36, 77, 78, 114, 116).
[EW17]
B. Elias and G. Williamson. “Diagrammatics for Coxeter groups
and their braid groups”. In: Quantum Topol. 8.3 (2017), pp. 413–
457. doi: 10.4171/QT/94 (cit. on p. 15).
[Erd94]
K. Erdmann. “Symmetric groups and quasi-hereditary algebras”.
In: Finite-dimensional algebras and related topics (Ottawa, ON,
1992). Vol. 424. NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci.
Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1994, pp. 123–161 (cit. on pp. 86,
87).
[EH02]
K. Erdmann and A. Henke. “On Ringel duality for Schur algebras”.
In: Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 132.1 (2002), pp. 97–116.
doi: 10.1017/S0305004101005485 (cit. on pp. 67, 88).
[Eti+15]
P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik. Tensor cate-
gories. Vol. 205. Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. Ameri-
can Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2015, pp. xvi+343. doi:
10.1090/surv/205 (cit. on p. 71).


PDF PAGE 133
REFERENCES
127
[FW14]
P. Fiebig and G. Williamson. “Parity sheaves, moment graphs and
the p-smooth locus of Schubert varieties”. In: Ann. Inst. Fourier
(Grenoble) 64.2 (2014), pp. 489–536 (cit. on p. 19).
[Ful97]
W. Fulton. Young tableaux. Vol. 35. London Mathematical Society
Student Texts. With applications to representation theory and ge-
ometry. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997, pp. x+260
(cit. on pp. 58, 61).
[Gar90]
D. Garﬁnkle. “On the classiﬁcation of primitive ideals for com-
plex classical Lie algebras. I”. In: Compositio Math. 75.2 (1990),
pp. 135–169 (cit. on pp. 6, 57).
[Gar92]
D. Garﬁnkle. “On the classiﬁcation of primitive ideals for com-
plex classical Lie algebra. II”. In: Compositio Math. 81.3 (1992),
pp. 307–336 (cit. on pp. 6, 57).
[Gar93]
D. Garﬁnkle. “On the classiﬁcation of primitive ideals for com-
plex classical Lie algebras. III”. In: Compositio Math. 88.2 (1993),
pp. 187–234 (cit. on pp. 6, 7, 38, 57).
[GPM]
D. Garﬁnkle, T. Pietraho, and W. M. McGovern. On the classiﬁ-
cation of primitive ideals for complex classical Lie algebras. IV. in
preparation (cit. on pp. 6, 7, 62).
[GM88]
A. M. Garsia and T. J. McLarnan. “Relations between Young’s
natural and the Kazhdan-Lusztig representations of Sn”. In: Adv.
in Math. 69.1 (1988), pp. 32–92. doi: 10.1016/0001-8708(88)
90060-6 (cit. on pp. 6, 58).
[GH15]
M. Geck and A. Halls. “On the Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in type E8”.
In: Math. Comp. 84.296 (2015), pp. 3029–3049. doi: 10.1090/
mcom/2963 (cit. on pp. 38, 57).
[GM94]
G. Georgiev and O. Mathieu. “Fusion rings for modular representa-
tions of Chevalley groups”. In: Mathematical aspects of conformal
and topological ﬁeld theories and quantum groups (South Hadley,
MA, 1992). Vol. 175. Contemp. Math. Amer. Math. Soc., Prov-
idence, RI, 1994, pp. 89–100. doi: 10.1090/conm/175/01839
(cit. on pp. 71, 73).
[Gör10]
U. Görtz.
“Aﬃne Springer ﬁbers and aﬃne Deligne-Lusztig va-
rieties”. In: Aﬃne ﬂag manifolds and principal bundles. Trends
Math. Birkhäuser/Springer Basel AG, Basel, 2010, pp. 1–50. doi:
10.1007/978-3-0346-0288-4_1 (cit. on pp. 4, 80).
[GL96]
J. J. Graham and G. I. Lehrer. “Cellular algebras”. In: Invent.
Math. 123.1 (1996), pp. 1–34. doi: 10.1007/BF01232365 (cit. on
p. 111).
[Gre07]
J. A. Green.
Polynomial representations of GLn.
augmented.
Vol. 830. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. With an appendix on
Schensted correspondence and Littelmann paths by K. Erdmann,
Green and M. Schocker. Springer, Berlin, 2007, pp. x+161 (cit. on
p. 86).
[Gro99]
I. Grojnowski. Aﬃne slp controls the representation theory of the
symmetric group and related Hecke algebras. 1999. eprint: arXiv:
math/9907129v1 (cit. on p. 1).


PDF PAGE 134
128
REFERENCES
[Här99]
M. Härterich. “Murphy bases of generalized Temperley-Lieb al-
gebras”. In: Arch. Math. (Basel) 72.5 (1999), pp. 337–345. doi:
10.1007/s000130050341 (cit. on p. 112).
[HW15]
X. He and G. Williamson. Soergel calculus and Schubert calculus.
2015. eprint: arXiv:1502.04914 (cit. on pp. 20, 21, 29, 30).
[HK83]
R. Hotta and N. Kawanaka. Open problems in algebraic groups.
Proc. Sympos. on Algebraic Groups and their Representations held
at Katata, August 29 - September 3, 1983. Tohoku University, 1983
(cit. on p. 37).
[Hum90]
J. E. Humphreys. Reﬂection groups and Coxeter groups. Vol. 29.
Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1990, pp. xii+204 (cit. on p. 11).
[IM65]
N. Iwahori and H. Matsumoto. “On some Bruhat decomposition
and the structure of the Hecke rings of p-adic Chevalley groups”.
In: Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 25 (1965), pp. 5–48 (cit.
on pp. 63–65).
[Jam90]
G. James. “The decomposition matrices of GLn(q) for n ≤10”.
In: Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 60.2 (1990), pp. 225–265. doi:
10.1112/plms/s3-60.2.225 (cit. on p. 1).
[Jan80]
J. C. Jantzen.
“Darstellungen halbeinfacher Gruppen und ihrer
Frobenius-Kerne”. In: J. Reine Angew. Math. 317 (1980), pp. 157–
199. doi: 10.1515/crll.1980.317.157 (cit. on pp. 68, 69).
[Jan03]
J. C. Jantzen. Representations of algebraic groups. Second. Vol. 107.
Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical
Society, Providence, RI, 2003, pp. xiv+576 (cit. on pp. 63, 65, 66,
68–70).
[JW17]
L. T. Jensen and G. Williamson. “The p-canonical basis for Hecke
algebras”.
In: Categoriﬁcation and higher representation theory.
Vol. 683.
Contemp. Math.
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
2017, pp. 333–361 (cit. on p. 2).
[Jon86]
V. F. R. Jones. “Braid groups, Hecke algebras and type II1 factors”.
In: Geometric methods in operator algebras (Kyoto, 1983). Vol. 123.
Pitman Res. Notes Math. Ser. Longman Sci. Tech., Harlow, 1986,
pp. 242–273 (cit. on p. 112).
[JMW14a]
D. Juteau, C. Mautner, and G. Williamson. Parity sheaves and
tilting modules. to appear in Annales scientiﬁques de l’École nor-
male supérieure. 2014. eprint: arXiv:1403.1647 (cit. on pp. 8,
79, 80).
[JMW14b]
D. Juteau, C. Mautner, and G. Williamson. “Parity sheaves”. In:
J. Amer. Math. Soc. 27.4 (2014), pp. 1169–1212. doi: 10.1090/
S0894-0347-2014-00804-3 (cit. on pp. 2, 4, 5, 19, 79–81, 84).
[Kan01]
R. Kane. Reﬂection groups and invariant theory. Vol. 5. CMS
Books in Mathematics/Ouvrages de Mathématiques de la SMC.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001, pp. x+379. doi: 10.1007/978-
1-4757-3542-0 (cit. on p. 63).


PDF PAGE 135
REFERENCES
129
[KS97]
M. Kashiwara and Y. Saito. “Geometric construction of crystal
bases”. In: Duke Math. J. 89.1 (1997), pp. 9–36. doi: 10.1215/
S0012-7094-97-08902-X (cit. on p. 30).
[KT08]
C. Kassel and V. Turaev. Braid groups. Vol. 247. Graduate Texts
in Mathematics. With the graphical assistance of Olivier Dodane.
New York: Springer, 2008, pp. xii+340. doi: 10.1007/978-0-
387-68548-9 (cit. on p. 105).
[KL79]
D. Kazhdan and G. Lusztig. “Representations of Coxeter groups
and Hecke algebras”. In: Invent. Math. 53.2 (1979), pp. 165–184.
doi: 10.1007/BF01390031 (cit. on pp. 5, 6, 13, 23, 32, 33, 38, 44,
45, 55, 58).
[KL80]
D. Kazhdan and G. Lusztig. “Schubert varieties and Poincaré du-
ality”. In: Geometry of the Laplace operator (Proc. Sympos. Pure
Math., Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1979).
Proc. Sympos.
Pure Math., XXXVI. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1980,
pp. 185–203 (cit. on pp. 3, 4).
[Knu70]
D. E. Knuth.
“Permutations, matrices, and generalized Young
tableaux”. In: Paciﬁc J. Math. 34 (1970), pp. 709–727 (cit. on
p. 59).
[KSX01]
S. König, I. H. Slungård, and C. Xi. “Double centralizer properties,
dominant dimension, and tilting modules”. In: J. Algebra 240.1
(2001), pp. 393–412.
doi: 10.1006/jabr.2000.8726
(cit. on
p. 86).
[Kum02]
S. Kumar. Kac-Moody groups, their ﬂag varieties and representa-
tion theory. Vol. 204. Progress in Mathematics. Birkhäuser Boston,
MA, 2002, pp. xvi+606. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-0105-2 (cit.
on p. 4).
[Lam01]
T. Y. Lam.
A ﬁrst course in noncommutative rings.
Second.
Vol. 131. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New
York, 2001, pp. xx+385. doi: 10.1007/978- 1- 4419- 8616- 0
(cit. on p. 21).
[LLT96]
A. Lascoux, B. Leclerc, and J.-Y. Thibon. “Hecke algebras at roots
of unity and crystal bases of quantum aﬃne algebras”. In: Comm.
Math. Phys. 181.1 (1996), pp. 205–263 (cit. on p. 1).
[Lib08]
N. Libedinsky. “Sur la catégorie des bimodules de Soergel”. In: J.
Algebra 320.7 (2008), pp. 2675–2694. doi: 10.1016/j.jalgebra.
2008.05.027 (cit. on p. 15).
[Lib10]
N. Libedinsky. “Presentation of right-angled Soergel categories by
generators and relations”. In: J. Pure Appl. Algebra 214.12 (2010),
pp. 2265–2278. doi: 10.1016/j.jpaa.2010.02.026 (cit. on p. 3).
[Lib15]
N. Libedinsky. “Light leaves and Lusztig’s conjecture”. In: Adv.
Math. 280 (2015), pp. 772–807. doi: 10.1016/j.aim.2015.04.022
(cit. on p. 16).
[LW17a]
N. Libedinsky and G. Williamson.
The anti-spherical category.
2017. eprint: arXiv:1702.00459 (cit. on p. 106).


PDF PAGE 136
130
REFERENCES
[Lus97]
G. Lusztig. “Cells in aﬃne Weyl groups and tensor categories”. In:
Adv. Math. 129.1 (1997), pp. 85–98. doi: 10.1006/aima.1997.
1645 (cit. on p. 81).
[Lus03]
G. Lusztig. Hecke algebras with unequal parameters. Vol. 18. CRM
Monograph Series. American Mathematical Society, Providence,
RI, 2003, pp. vi+136 (cit. on pp. 25, 34, 40, 43, 61).
[Lus17]
G. Lusztig. Comments on my papers. 2017. eprint: arXiv:1707.
09368 (cit. on p. 5).
[Lus80a]
G. Lusztig. “Hecke algebras and Jantzen’s generic decomposition
patterns”. In: Adv. in Math. 37.2 (1980), pp. 121–164. doi: 10.
1016/0001-8708(80)90031-6 (cit. on p. 100).
[Lus80b]
G. Lusztig.
“Some problems in the representation theory of ﬁ-
nite Chevalley groups”. In: The Santa Cruz Conference on Finite
Groups (Univ. California, Santa Cruz, Calif., 1979). Vol. 37. Proc.
Sympos. Pure Math. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1980,
pp. 313–317 (cit. on p. 1).
[Lus83a]
G. Lusztig. “Singularities, character formulas, and a q-analog of
weight multiplicities”. In: Analysis and topology on singular spaces,
II, III (Luminy, 1981). Vol. 101. Astérisque. Soc. Math. France,
Paris, 1983, pp. 208–229 (cit. on p. 81).
[Lus83b]
G. Lusztig. “Some examples of square integrable representations
of semisimple p-adic groups”. In: Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 277.2
(1983), pp. 623–653. doi: 10.2307/1999228 (cit. on pp. 38, 40,
90).
[Lus85]
G. Lusztig. “Cells in aﬃne Weyl groups”. In: Algebraic groups
and related topics (Kyoto/Nagoya, 1983). Vol. 6. Adv. Stud. Pure
Math.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985,
pp. 255–287
(cit. on
pp. 6, 38, 49, 53, 56, 96).
[Lus87]
G. Lusztig. “Cells in aﬃne Weyl groups. II”. In: J. Algebra 109.2
(1987), pp. 536–548. doi: 10.1016/0021-8693(87)90154-2 (cit.
on pp. 39, 72, 91).
[Lus89]
G. Lusztig. “Cells in aﬃne Weyl groups. IV”. In: J. Fac. Sci. Univ.
Tokyo Sect. IA Math. 36.2 (1989), pp. 297–328 (cit. on p. 104).
[LW17b]
G. Lusztig and G. Williamson. Billiards and tilting characters for
SL3. 2017. eprint: arXiv:1703.05898 (cit. on pp. 2, 6, 92).
[LX88]
G. Lusztig and N. H. Xi.
“Canonical left cells in aﬃne Weyl
groups”. In: Adv. in Math. 72.2 (1988), pp. 284–288. doi: 10.
1016/0001-8708(88)90031-X (cit. on pp. 8, 77, 105).
[Mak15]
R. Maksimau. “Canonical basis, KLR algebras and parity sheaves”.
In: J. Algebra 422 (2015), pp. 563–610. doi: 10.1016/j.jalgebra.
2014.08.052 (cit. on p. 4).
[Mat94]
A. Mathas. “Some generic representations, W-graphs, and duality”.
In: J. Algebra 170.1 (1994), pp. 322–353. doi: 10.1006/jabr.
1994.1341 (cit. on p. 6).
[Mat90]
O. Mathieu. “Filtrations of G-modules”. In: Ann. Sci. École Norm.
Sup. (4) 23.4 (1990), pp. 625–644 (cit. on p. 67).


PDF PAGE 137
REFERENCES
131
[MR15]
C. Mautner and S. Riche. Exotic tilting sheaves, parity sheaves on
aﬃne Grassmannians, and the Mirkovic-Vilonen conjecture. 2015.
eprint: arXiv:1501.07369v2 (cit. on pp. 8, 80, 83, 84).
[MS08]
V. Mazorchuk and C. Stroppel. “Categoriﬁcation of (induced) cell
modules and the rough structure of generalised Verma modules”.
In: Adv. Math. 219.4 (2008), pp. 1363–1426. doi: 10.1016/j.aim.
2008.06.019 (cit. on p. 6).
[MP05]
T. P. McDonough and C. A. Pallikaros.
“On relations between
the classical and the Kazhdan-Lusztig representations of symmetric
groups and associated Hecke algebras”. In: J. Pure Appl. Algebra
203.1-3 (2005), pp. 133–144. doi: 10.1016/j.jpaa.2005.03.015
(cit. on p. 6).
[McG96]
W. M. McGovern.
“Left cells and domino tableaux in classical
Weyl groups”. In: Compositio Math. 101.1 (1996), pp. 77–98 (cit.
on p. 6).
[MV07]
I. Mirković and K. Vilonen.
“Geometric Langlands duality and
representations of algebraic groups over commutative rings”. In:
Ann. of Math. (2) 166.1 (2007), pp. 95–143. doi: 10.4007/annals.
2007.166.95 (cit. on pp. 8, 79).
[Nad05]
D. Nadler. “Perverse sheaves on real loop Grassmannians”. In:
Invent. Math. 159.1 (2005), pp. 1–73. doi: 10.1007/s00222-004-
0382-3 (cit. on p. 81).
[Ost97]
V. Ostrik. “Tensor ideals in the category of tilting modules”. In:
Transform. Groups 2.3 (1997), pp. 279–287.
doi: 10.1007/BF
01234661 (cit. on pp. 7, 8, 77).
[Ost01]
V. Ostrik. “Dimensions of quantized tilting modules”. In: Mosc.
Math. J. 1.1 (2001), pp. 65–71 (cit. on p. 70).
[Par89]
B. J. Parshall. “Finite-dimensional algebras and algebraic groups”.
In: Classical groups and related topics (Beijing, 1987).
Vol. 82.
Contemp. Math. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1989, pp. 97–
114. doi: 10.1090/conm/082/982281 (cit. on p. 86).
[Pat17]
L. Patimo. Hodge theoretic aspects of Soergel bimodules and repre-
sentation theory. PhD thesis in preparation. 2017 (cit. on p. 78).
[RW16]
S. Riche and G. Williamson. Tilting modules and the p-canonical
basis. 2016. eprint: arXiv:1512.08296v2 (cit. on pp. 2, 4, 8, 12,
24, 76–78, 81, 116).
[Rin92]
C. M. Ringel. “The category of good modules over a quasi-hereditary
algebra”. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Representations of Algebras (Ottawa, ON, 1992). Vol. 14. Carleton-
Ottawa Math. Lecture Note Ser.
Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON,
1992, p. 17 (cit. on p. 86).
[Rou12]
R. Rouquier.
“Quiver Hecke algebras and 2-Lie algebras”.
In:
Algebra Colloq. 19.2 (2012), pp. 359–410. doi: 10.1142/S1005386
712000247 (cit. on p. 1).


PDF PAGE 138
132
REFERENCES
[Sga]
Schémas en groupes. III: Structure des schémas en groupes réduc-
tifs. Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois Marie 1962/64
(SGA 3). Dirigé par M. Demazure et A. Grothendieck. Lecture
Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 153. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York,
1970, pp. viii+529 (cit. on p. 12).
[Shi86]
J.-Y. Shi. The Kazhdan-Lusztig cells in certain aﬃne Weyl groups.
Vol. 1179. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
1986, pp. x+307. doi: 10.1007/BFb0074968 (cit. on p. 38).
[Shi88]
J.-Y. Shi. “A two-sided cell in an aﬃne Weyl group. II”. In: J.
London Math. Soc. (2) 37.2 (1988), pp. 253–264. doi: 10.1112/
jlms/s2-37.2.253 (cit. on p. 38).
[Shi94]
J.-Y. Shi. “Left cells in aﬃne Weyl groups”. In: Tohoku Math.
J. (2) 46.1 (1994), pp. 105–124. doi: 10.2748/tmj/1178225804
(cit. on p. 53).
[Shi02]
J.-Y. Shi. “Coxeter elements and Kazhdan-Lusztig cells”. In: J.
Algebra 250.1 (2002), pp. 229–251. doi: 10.1006/jabr.2001.9090
(cit. on p. 38).
[Shi06]
J.-Y. Shi.
“Left cells containing a fully commutative element”.
In: J. Combin. Theory Ser. A 113.3 (2006), pp. 556–565.
doi:
10.1016/j.jcta.2005.04.007 (cit. on p. 38).
[Soe97a]
W. Soergel. “Charakterformeln für Kipp-Moduln über Kac-Moody-
Algebren”.
In: Represent. Theory 1 (1997), pp. 115–132.
doi:
10.1090/S1088-4165-97-00017-4 (cit. on p. 8).
[Soe97b]
W. Soergel. “Kazhdan-Lusztig-Polynome und eine Kombinatorik
für Kipp-Moduln”. In: Represent. Theory 1 (1997), 37–68 (elec-
tronic). doi: 10.1090/S1088-4165-97-00006-X (cit. on pp. 8,
13, 74, 75, 100).
[Soe98]
W. Soergel. “Combinatorics of Harish-Chandra modules”. In: Rep-
resentation theories and algebraic geometry (Montreal, PQ, 1997).
Vol. 514. NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Acad. Publ., 1998, pp. 401–412 (cit. on p. 3).
[Soe00]
W. Soergel. “On the relation between intersection cohomology and
representation theory in positive characteristic”. In: J. Pure Appl.
Algebra 152.1-3 (2000). Commutative algebra, homological algebra
and representation theory (Catania/Genoa/Rome, 1998), pp. 311–
335. doi: 10.1016/S0022-4049(99)00138-3 (cit. on pp. 2, 4).
[Soe01]
W. Soergel.
“Langlands’ philosophy and Koszul duality”.
In:
Algebra—representation theory (Constanta, 2000). Vol. 28. NATO
Sci. Ser. II Math. Phys. Chem. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht,
2001, pp. 379–414. doi: 10.1007/978-94-010-0814-3_17 (cit. on
p. 1).
[Soe07]
W. Soergel. “Kazhdan-Lusztig-Polynome und unzerlegbare Bimod-
uln über Polynomringen”. In: J. Inst. Math. Jussieu 6.3 (2007),
pp. 501–525. doi: 10.1017/S1474748007000023 (cit. on p. 3).
[Spr82]
T. A. Springer. “Quelques applications de la cohomologie d’intersection”.
In: Bourbaki Seminar, Vol. 1981/1982. Vol. 92. Astérisque. Soc.
Math. France, Paris, 1982, pp. 249–273 (cit. on p. 4).


PDF PAGE 139
REFERENCES
133
[Spr89]
T. A. Springer.
“Linear algebraic groups”.
In: Algebraic geom-
etry, 4 (Russian). Itogi Nauki i Tekhniki.
Translated from the
English. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Vsesoyuz. Inst. Nauchn. i Tekhn. In-
form., Moscow, 1989, pp. 5–136, 310–314, 315 (cit. on p. 12).
[Ste63]
R. Steinberg. “Representations of algebraic groups”. In: Nagoya
Math. J. 22 (1963), pp. 33–56 (cit. on p. 85).
[VV11]
M. Varagnolo and E. Vasserot. “Canonical bases and KLR-algebras”.
In: J. Reine Angew. Math. 659 (2011), pp. 67–100. doi: 10.1515/
CRELLE.2011.068 (cit. on p. 1).
[VW13]
K. Vilonen and G. Williamson. “Characteristic cycles and decom-
position numbers”. In: Math. Res. Lett. 20.2 (2013), pp. 359–366.
doi: 10.4310/MRL.2013.v20.n2.a11 (cit. on p. 5).
[Vog79]
D. A. Vogan Jr. “A generalized τ-invariant for the primitive spec-
trum of a semisimple Lie algebra”. In: Math. Ann. 242.3 (1979),
pp. 209–224. doi: 10.1007/BF01420727 (cit. on pp. 56, 57).
[Vog80]
D. A. Vogan Jr. “Ordering of the primitive spectrum of a semisim-
ple Lie algebra”. In: Math. Ann. 248.3 (1980), pp. 195–203. doi:
10.1007/BF01420525 (cit. on p. 57).
[Wen87]
H. Wenzl. “On sequences of projections”. In: C. R. Math. Rep.
Acad. Sci. Canada 9.1 (1987), pp. 5–9 (cit. on p. 112).
[Wil03]
G. Williamson.
“Why the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis of the Hecke
algebra of type A is cellular”. available at http://people.mpim-
bonn.mpg.de/geordie/Hecke.pdf. 10/2003 (cit. on pp. 32, 59).
[Wil11]
G. Williamson. “Singular Soergel bimodules”. In: Int. Math. Res.
Not. IMRN 20 (2011), pp. 4555–4632. doi: 10.1093/imrn/rnq263
(cit. on pp. 81, 82).
[Wil12]
G. Williamson.
Some examples of parity sheaves.
Oberwolfach
report for the meeting “Enveloping Algebras and Geometric Rep-
resentation Theory”, available under: http://people.mpim-bonn.
mpg.de/geordie/GWilliamson-EnvAlg.pdf. 2012 (cit. on pp. 2,
18).
[Wil15]
G. Williamson.
“A reducible characteristic variety in type A”.
In: Representations of reductive groups. Vol. 312. Progr. Math.
Birkhäuser/Springer, Cham, 2015, pp. 517–532 (cit. on pp. 5, 21,
62).
[Wil17a]
G. Williamson. “Algebraic representations and constructible sheaves”.
In: Jpn. J. Math. 12.2 (2017), pp. 211–259. doi: 10.1007/s11537-
017-1646-1 (cit. on p. 63).
[Wil17b]
G. Williamson.
“On torsion in the intersection cohomology of
Schubert varieties”. In: J. Algebra 475 (2017), pp. 207–228. doi:
10.1016/j.jalgebra.2016.06.006 (cit. on p. 57).
[Wil17c]
G. Williamson. “Schubert calculus and torsion explosion”. In: J.
Amer. Math. Soc. 30.4 (2017). With a joint appendix with Alex
Kontorovich and Peter J. McNamara, pp. 1023–1046.
doi: 10.
1090/jams/868 (cit. on pp. 2, 6, 57).


PDF PAGE 140
134
REFERENCES
[WB12]
G. Williamson and T. Braden. “Modular intersection cohomology
complexes on ﬂag varieties”. In: Math. Z. 272.3-4 (2012), pp. 697–
727. doi: 10.1007/s00209-011-0955-y (cit. on pp. 2, 4, 19, 21,
29, 30, 83).
[Xi89]
N. H. Xi. “An approach to the connectedness of the left cells in
aﬃne Weyl groups”.
In: Bull. London Math. Soc. 21.6 (1989),
pp. 557–561. doi: 10.1112/blms/21.6.557 (cit. on p. 38).
[Xi90]
N. H. Xi. “The based ring of the lowest two-sided cell of an aﬃne
Weyl group”. In: J. Algebra 134.2 (1990), pp. 356–368. doi: 10.
1016/0021-8693(90)90059-W (cit. on p. 100).
[Zhu16]
X. Zhu. An introduction to aﬃne Grassmannians and the geometric
Satake equivalence.
2016.
eprint: arXiv:1603.05593
(cit. on
pp. 79, 80).
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics, Vivatsgasse 7, 53111 Bonn
E-mail address, Lars Thorge Jensen: ltjensen@mpim-bonn.mpg.de
