PDF PAGE 40
DIVISORS
40
K0 maps to zero in K1 for sufficiently large subrings A1 ⊂A. Since K0 is finitely
generated, we conclude that K1 = 0 for a suitable choice of A1.
Set f1 : X1 →S1 equal to Spec of the ring map A1 →B1. Set D1 = Spec(B1/h1B1).
Since B = B1 ⊗A1 A, i.e., X = X1 ×S1 S, it now suffices to prove the lemma for
X1 →S1 and the relative effective Cartier divisor D1, see Morphisms, Lemma 26.7.
Hence we have reduced to the case where A is a Noetherian ring.
In this case
we know that the ring map A →B is flat at every prime q of V (h) by Lemma
19.5. Combined with the fact that the flat locus is open in this case, see Algebra,
Theorem 129.4 we win.
□
There is also the following lemma (whose idea is apparently due to Michael Artin,
see [Nob77]) which needs no finiteness assumptions at all.
Lemma 19.7.
062W
Let f : X →S be a morphism of schemes. Let D ⊂X be a relative
effective Cartier divisor on X/S. If f is flat at all points of X \ D, then f is flat.
Proof. This translates into the following algebra fact: Let A →B be a ring map
and h ∈B. Assume h is a nonzerodivisor, that B/hB is flat over A, and that the
localization Bh is flat over A. Then B is flat over A. The reason is that we have a
short exact sequence
0 →B →Bh →colimn(1/hn)B/B →0
and that the second and third terms are flat over A, which implies that B is flat over
A (see Algebra, Lemma 39.13). Note that a filtered colimit of flat modules is flat
(see Algebra, Lemma 39.3) and that by induction on n each (1/hn)B/B ∼= B/hnB
is flat over A since it fits into the short exact sequence
0 →B/hn−1B
h−→B/hnB →B/hB →0
Some details omitted.
□
Example 19.8.
062X
Here is an example of a relative effective Cartier divisor D where
the ambient scheme is not flat in a neighbourhood of D. Namely, let A = k[t] and
B = k[t, x, y, x−1y, x−2y, . . .]/(ty, tx−1y, tx−2y, . . .)
Then B is not flat over A but B/xB ∼= A is flat over A. Moreover x is a nonzerodi-
visor and hence defines a relative effective Cartier divisor in Spec(B) over Spec(A).
If the ambient scheme is flat and locally of finite presentation over the base, then
we can characterize a relative effective Cartier divisor in terms of its fibres. See
also More on Morphisms, Lemma 23.1 for a slightly different take on this lemma.
Lemma 19.9.
062Y
Let φ : X →S be a flat morphism which is locally of finite
presentation. Let Z ⊂X be a closed subscheme. Let x ∈Z with image s ∈S.
(1) If Zs ⊂Xs is a Cartier divisor in a neighbourhood of x, then there exists
an open U ⊂X and a relative effective Cartier divisor D ⊂U such that
Z ∩U ⊂D and Zs ∩U = Ds.
(2) If Zs ⊂Xs is a Cartier divisor in a neighbourhood of x, the morphism
Z →X is of finite presentation, and Z →S is flat at x, then we can
choose U and D such that Z ∩U = D.
(3) If Zs ⊂Xs is a Cartier divisor in a neighbourhood of x and Z is a locally
principal closed subscheme of X in a neighbourhood of x, then we can choose
U and D such that Z ∩U = D.


PDF PAGE 41
DIVISORS
41
In particular, if Z →S is locally of finite presentation and flat and all fibres
Zs ⊂Xs are effective Cartier divisors, then Z is a relative effective Cartier divisor.
Similarly, if Z is a locally principal closed subscheme of X such that all fibres
Zs ⊂Xs are effective Cartier divisors, then Z is a relative effective Cartier divisor.
Proof. Choose affine open neighbourhoods Spec(A) of s and Spec(B) of x such
that φ(Spec(B)) ⊂Spec(A). Let p ⊂A be the prime ideal corresponding to s. Let
q ⊂B be the prime ideal corresponding to x. Let I ⊂B be the ideal corresponding
to Z. By the initial assumption of the lemma we know that A →B is flat and of
finite presentation. The assumption in (1) means that, after shrinking Spec(B), we
may assume I(B⊗Aκ(p)) is generated by a single element which is a nonzerodivisor
in B ⊗A κ(p). Say f ∈I maps to this generator. We claim that after inverting
an element g ∈B, g ̸∈q the closed subscheme D = V (f) ⊂Spec(Bg) is a relative
effective Cartier divisor.
By Algebra, Lemma 168.1 we can find a flat finite type ring map A0 →B0 of
Noetherian rings, an element f0 ∈B0, a ring map A0 →A and an isomorphism
A ⊗A0 B0 ∼= B. If p0 = A0 ∩p then we see that
B ⊗A κ(p) = (B0 ⊗A0 κ(p0)) ⊗κ(p0)) κ(p)
hence f0 is a nonzerodivisor in B0 ⊗A0 κ(p0). By Algebra, Lemma 99.2 we see
that f0 is a nonzerodivisor in (B0)q0 where q0 = B0 ∩q and that (B0/f0B0)q0 is
flat over A0. Hence by Algebra, Lemma 68.6 and Algebra, Theorem 129.4 there
exists a g0 ∈B0, g0 ̸∈q0 such that f0 is a nonzerodivisor in (B0)g0 and such that
(B0/f0B0)g0 is flat over A0. Hence we see that D0 = V (f0) ⊂Spec((B0)g0) is
a relative effective Cartier divisor. Since we know that this property is preserved
under base change, see Lemma 19.1, we obtain the claim mentioned above with g
equal to the image of g0 in B.
At this point we have proved (1). To see (2) consider the closed immersion Z →D.
The surjective ring map u : OD,x →OZ,x is a map of flat local OS,s-algebras which
are essentially of finite presentation, and which becomes an isomorphisms after
dividing by ms. Hence it is an isomorphism, see Algebra, Lemma 128.4. It follows
that Z →D is an isomorphism in a neighbourhood of x, see Algebra, Lemma
126.6. To see (3), after possibly shrinking U we may assume that the ideal of D
is generated by a single nonzerodivisor f and the ideal of Z is generated by an
element g. Then f = gh. But g|Us and f|Us cut out the same effective Cartier
divisor in a neighbourhood of x. Hence h|Xs is a unit in OXs,x, hence h is a unit
in OX,x hence h is a unit in an open neighbourhood of x. I.e., Z ∩U = D after
shrinking U.
The final statements of the lemma follow immediately from parts (2) and (3),
combined with the fact that Z →S is locally of finite presentation if and only if
Z →X is of finite presentation, see Morphisms, Lemmas 22.3 and 22.11.
□
20. The normal cone of an immersion
062Z
Let i : Z →X be a closed immersion. Let I ⊂OX be the corresponding quasi-
coherent sheaf of ideals. Consider the quasi-coherent sheaf of graded OX-algebras
L
n≥0 In/In+1. Since the sheaves In/In+1 are each annihilated by I this graded
algebra corresponds to a quasi-coherent sheaf of graded OZ-algebras by Morphisms,
Lemma 4.1. This quasi-coherent graded OZ-algebra is called the conormal algebra
